MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF ADAPTATION
IN HUMAN-ROBOT COLLABORATION
Stefanos Nikolaidis1, Jodi Forlizzi2, David Hsu3, Julie Shah4 and Siddhartha Srinivasa1
1The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
3Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
4Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
snikolai@cmu.edu, forlizzi@cs.cmu.edu, dyhsu@comp.nus.edu.sg,
julie_a_shah@csail.mit.edu, siddh@cmu.edu
Abstract—A robot operating in isolation needs to reason
over the uncertainty in its model of the world and adapt its
ownactionstoaccountforthisuncertainty.Similarly,arobot
interacting with people needs to reason over its uncertainty
over the human internal state, as well as over how this
state may change, as humans adapt to the robot. This paper
summarizes our own work in this area, which depicts the
different ways that probabilistic planning and game-theoretic
algorithms can enable such reasoning in robotic systems that
collaborate with people. We start with a general formulation
Fig. 1: The robot maximizes the performance of the
of the problem as a two-player game with incomplete infor-
human-robot team by executing the optimal policy
πR∗
.
mation. We then articulate the different assumptions within
this general formulation, and we explain how these lead to Therobottakesinformation-seeking actionsthatallowes-
exciting and diverse robot behaviors in real-time interactions timationofthehumanpolicyπH,butalsocommunicative
with actual human subjects, in a variety of manufacturing, actions that guide πH towards better ways of doing the
personal robotics and assistive care settings.
task. These actions emerge out of optimizing for
πR∗
.
I. INTRODUCTION
In human collaboration, the success of the team often
depends on the ability of team members to coordinate internalstate,i.e.,theirowngoalsandexpectationsabout
their actions, by reasoning over the beliefs and actions of the world and the robot. Their state can change, as they
theirteammates.Wewanttoenablerobotteammateswith adapt themselves to the robot and its actions. Much like
this very capability in human-robot teams, e.g., service in manipulation, a robot interacting with people needs
robots interacting with users at home, manufacturing to use this information when choosing its own actions
robots sharing the same physical scape with human me- (Fig.1).Thisrequiresnotonlyanunderstandingofhuman
chanicsandautonomouscarsinteractingwithdriversand behavior when interacting with robotic systems, but also
pedestrians. of the computational challenges and opportunities that
When it comes to robots operating in isolation, there arise by enabling this reasoning into deployed systems in
has been tremendous progress in enabling them to act the real world.
autonomously by reasoning over the physical state of the Toaddressthesechallenges,wehaveusedinsightsfrom
world. A manipulator picking up a glass needs to know behavioral economics to propose scalable models of hu-
the position and orientation of the glass on the table, man behavior and machine learning algorithms to auto-
the location of other objects that it should avoid, and the matically learn these models from data. Integrating these
way these objects will move if pushed to the side. More models into probabilistic planning and game-theoretic
importantly, it needs to reason over the uncertainty in its algorithms has allowed generation of robot actions in a
model of the world and adapt its own actions to account computationally tractable manner.
for this uncertainty, for instance by looking at the table This paper is a summary of our work in this area,
with its camera, or by moving slowly until it senses the which has been inspired by recent technical advances in
glass in its gripper. human-robot interaction [1], and to a large extent it has
However, humans are not just obstacles that the robot been made possible by breakthroughs in computational
should avoid. They are intelligent agents with their own representations of uncertainty [2], and in algorithms that
have leveraged these representations [3]. It has also been
This is a summary of work done in collaboration with Keren Gu,
inspiredbytheremarkableresultsofgame-theoreticalgo-
AntonKuznetsov,MinaeKwon,PremyszlawLasota,SwapravaNath,Ariel
Procaccia,RamyaRamakrishnan,YuXiangZhu. rithms in deployed applications [4].
7102
guA
4
]OR.sc[
2v68520.7071:viXra

Fig. 2: We have applied our research to human-robot collaboration across different robot morphologies and settings:
in manufacturing, assistive care, social navigation and at home.
We start by formulating our overarching goal of com- task. Over the course of a task of total time duration T,
putingtherobotactionsthatmaximizeteamperformance robot and human receive an accumulated reward:
as an optimization problem in a two-player game with
T
incomplete information (Sec. II). In hindsight, our ap- (cid:88) RR(x ,aR,aH)
t t t
proachesinthelastyearsreflectthedifferentassumptions t=1
andapproximationsthatwemadewithinthescopeofthis
for the robot and
general formulation.
We start by assuming a leader-assistant teamwork (cid:88) T RH(x ,aR,aH)
model 1, where the goal of the robot is to follow the t t t
t=1
human preference (Sec. III). We show that this model is
for the human.
an instance of our general framework by representing the
We assume a robot policy πR, which maps world states
human preference as a reward function, shared by both
to actions. The human chooses their own actions based
agents and unknown to the robot. We show that cross-
on a human policy πH. If the robot could control both its
training [5], [6], an algorithm emulating effective human
ownandthehumanactions,itwouldsimplycomputethe
team training practices, as well as clustering users into
policies that maximize its own reward.
types from joint-action demonstrations [7] significantly
However, the human is not another actuator that the
improves robot adaptation to the human.
robot can control. Instead, the robot can only estimate
Wethenexaminethecasewhentherobotcanindirectly
thehumandecisionmakingprocessfromobservationand
affect human actions as an equal partner, by treating
make predictions about future human behavior, which in
the interaction as an underactuated dynamical system
turn will affect the reward that the robot will receive.
(Sec. IV). We present a bounded-memory model [8]–[10]
Therefore,theoptimalpolicyfortherobotiscomputed
and a best-response model of human behavior [11], and
by taking the expectation over human policies πH.
show that this results in human-adaptation to the robot.
Finally,closingtheloopbetweenthetworesultsinmu-
(cid:34) (cid:35)
T
tualadaptation(Sec.IV):Therobotbuildsonlineamodel πR∗ ∈argmax (cid:69) (cid:88) RR(x ,aR,aH)|πR,πH (1)
t t t
of the human adaptation by taking information seeking πR t=1
actions, and adapts its own actions in return [8]–[10].
Solving this optimization is challenging: First, the hu-
Table I organizes the works presented in this paper, with manrewardRH maybeunknowntotherobotinadvance.
respect to the different aspects of the general formulation Second, even if the robot knows RH, it may be unable to
that each one addresses.
predict accurately the human actions, since human be-
Each section articulates the different assumptions
havior is characterized by bounded rationality [12]. Third,
and explains how these lead to the robot behaviors
even if the human acts always rationally, exhaustively
that we observed in real-time interactions with actual
searching for the equilibria is computationally intractable
human subjects, in a variety of manufacturing, home in most cases [13]. Finally, even if RH ≡RR, most real-
environments and assistive care settings (Fig. 2).
world problems have multiple equilibria, and in the ab-
sence of a signaling mechanism, it is impossible to know
which ones the agents will choose.
II. PROBLEMFORMULATION
III. ROBOTADAPTATION.
Human-robotcollaborationcanbeformulatedasatwo
Inseveralmanufacturingapplications,suchasassembly
player game with partial information. We let x be the
t
tasks,althoughimportantconceptssuchastolerancesand
worldstatethatcapturestheinformationthathumanand
robotuseattimet totakeactionsaR,aHinacollaborative completion times are well-defined, many of the details
t t
are largely left up to the individualized preference of the
1Wereferthereaderto[14]forthedefinitionsofleader-assistant and mechanics. A robotic assistant interacting with a new
equalpartnersteamworkmodels. human worker should be able to learn the preferences of

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Concurrent Human Robot
Motion Idle Time Idle Time
)s(emiT
Cross-Training
Sarsa( )
Fig. 3: Cross-training in a virtual environment leads to fluent human-robot teaming.
its human partner in order to be an effective teammate. phase enables the robot to observe the human actions
We assume a leader-assistant teamwork model, where and estimate the human policy πH. The rotation phase
the human leader’s preference is captured by the human allows the robot to observe the human inputs on the
reward function RH and the human policy πH. In this robot actions and infer the human preference RH from
model, the goal of the robot is to execute actions aligned human demonstrations [16]. After each training round,
with the human preference. Therefore, in Eq. 1, we have: which occurs in a virtual environment, the robot uses the
new estimates to compute the optimal policy from Eq. 1.
RR≡RH
Ourstudiesshowedthatcross-trainingprovidessignificant
Learning of a Human Model.LearningjointlyπH andRH improvements in quantitative metrics of team fluency, as
well as in the perceived robot performance and trust in
can be challenging in settings where human and robot
therobot(Fig.3).Theseresultsprovidethefirstindication
takeactionssimultaneously,anddonothaveidenticalac-
that effective and fluent human-robot teaming may be
tionsets.Toenablearobottolearnthehumanpreference
best achieved by modeling effective training practices for
in collaborative settings, we looked at how humans com-
human teamwork.
municate effectively their preferences in human teams.
In previous work [14], insights from human teamwork Inference of a Human Type. Cross-training works by
have informed the design of a robot plan execution learning an individualized model for each human team-
system which improved human-robot team performance. mate. For more complex tasks, this results in a large
We focused on a team training technique known as cross- number of training rounds, which can be tedious from
training, where human team-members switch roles to a human-robot interaction perspective. However, our pi-
develop shared expectations on the task. This, in turn lot studies showed that even when there was a very
allows them to anticipate one another’s needs and coor- large number of feasible action sequences towards task
dinateeffectively.Usingthisinsight,weproposedhuman- completion, people followed a limited number of “domi-
robot cross-training [5], [6], [15], a framework where the nant” strategies. Using this insight, we used unsupervised
robot learns a model of its human counter-part through learning techniques to identify distinct human types from
two phases: a forward-phase, where human and robot joint-action demonstrations (Fig. 4) [7]. For each type
followtheirpre-definedroles,andarotationphase,where y ∈Y, we used supervised learning techniques to learn
the roles of human and robot are switched. The forward the human reward RH(x ,aR,aH;y), as well as the human
t t t
Cross Human Bounded Best Mutual
Training TypeInference Memory Response Adaptation
[5],[6],[15] [7] [8],[10] [11] [8]–[10]
(cid:51) (cid:51)
Known
HUMANMODEL (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
Unknown
(cid:51) (cid:51)
Independent
INTERACTIONMODEL (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
Underactuated
(cid:51) (cid:51)
Leader-Assistant
TEAMWORKMODEL (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
EqualPartners
TABLE I: Each work makes different assumptions on the human, interaction and teamwork models.

RR aH RH aH
aR aR
α 1 α
−
Fig. 4: We clustered participants into types, based on how
Fig.5:Thehumanstatechanges,asthehumanplayswith
their preference of executing a hand-finishing task with
probability α the best response to the robot action aR
the robot.
(middle row) with respect to the robot reward function
RR, instead of playing the best-response with respect to
policy πH(x ;y), This simplified the problem of learning their own reward function RH.
t
RH,πH of a new human worker, to simply inferring their
type y. We enabled this inference by denoting the human
underactuateddynamical system, where therobotreasons
typeasalatentvariableinapartiallyobservablestochastic
overhowitsownactionsaffectfuturehumanactions,and
process(POMDP).Thisallowedtherobottotakeinforma-
takes that into account into its own decision making.
tionseekingactionsinordertoinferonlinethetypeanew
A Bounded-Memory Model. This history h can grow
user, and execute actions aligned with the preference of t
arbitrarily large, making optimizing for the robot actions
that type. This draws upon insights from previous work
computationally intractable. In practice, however, people
on cooperative games [17] and vehicle navigation [18],
do not have perfect recall. Using insights from work on
where the human intent was modeled as a latent variable
bounded-rationality in behavioral economics, we simplify
in a POMDP, albeit with prespecified models of human
theoptimization,usingaBounded-memoryhumanAdap-
types. In a human subject experiment, participants found
tationModel(BAM)[8],[10].Thehumanobservesarecent
that the robot executing the computed policy anticipated
history of interactions h :
their actions, and in complex robot configurations they k
completedthetaskfasterthanmanuallyannotatingrobot h k =(x t−k ,a t R −k ,...,x t ,a t R)
actions.
andinfersaprobabilitydistributionoverjointglobalplans
IV. HUMANADAPTATION.
that the robot is executing. They may then switch from
As robotics systems become more advanced, they have theplantheycurrentlyfollow,toanewplandemonstrated
access to information that the human may not have; this by the robot with some probability associated with their
suggests that rather than always following the human, type y – their willingness to adapt to the robot.
theycouldusethisinformationasequalpartnerstoguide A Best-Response Model. A particular instance of treating
their human teammates towards better ways of doing interaction as an underactuated system is modeling peo-
the task. In that case, it is no longer optimal for the ple as computing a best-response to the last robot action
robottooptimizethehumanrewardfunction;instead,the using their reward function RH:
robot should maximize its own reward function, which is
πH(x ,aR;y)∈argmax RH(x ,aR,aH;y)
different than the human’s: t t t t t
aH
RR(cid:54)=RH
In [11], we additionally broke the assumption that
RH is static; instead, as the human observes the robot’s
An improvement upon the leader-assistant setting is to
actions and the outcomes, they may change their reward
recognizethatthehumanpolicycanchangebasedonthe
function RH to match those of the robot’s. We captured
robot actions. We let a history of world states and robot
thischangebyassumingthattherewardparameters y are
actions h :
t
h =(x ,aR,...,x ,aR) not static but change stochastically based on the robot
t 0 0 t t actions, according to a transition function: P(y t+1 |y t ,a t R).
Given this history, the human policy πH(x ,h ;y) is Forinstance,thehumanmaylearnthetruebestresponse
t t
a function not only of the current world state x and to a robot action with some probability (Fig. 5). Including
t
human type y , but also of the history h . Modeling the this model in the optimization of Eq. 1 allows the robot
t t
human policy as a function of the robot actions and to take informative actions to teach the human, even by
solvingtheoptimizationofEq.1makestheinteractionan failing in purpose [11].

Fig. 6: Two different users control an assistive arm through joystick inputs. The plot indicates the robot belief (y-axis)
on user’s adaptability (x-axis). The robot starts by moving straight towards both bottles, in order to infer the user
adaptability. Top, left to right: A non-adaptable user insists on moving the joystick to the left and the robot adapts to
the user to retain their trust. Bottom, left to right: The user changes their inputs to align them with the robot actions.
The robot infers that the user is adaptable and guides them towards the optimal goal (right bottle).
The cardinality of Y can grow exponential to the num-
ber of robot actions, which makes the problem compu-
tationally hard. Using our intuition that early exploration
should be encouraged, in [11] we simplified the compu-
tation via a linear-time optimal algorithm for solving the
maximization of Eq. 1, and showed that our model can
capture accurately the evolution of human behavior in a
table-clearing setting.
V. MUTUALADAPTATION.
In our models of human adaptation, we have assumed
that the robot knows the type y of the human, which
parameterizes the human policy πH and the human User 1 User 2 User 3
reward function RH. However, our studies have shown
Fig. 7: Different paths on MOMDP policy tree for a
that there is a large variability among different types
human-robot (white/black dot) table-carrying task. The
y. Additionally, the type y of a new human worker is
circle color represents the belief on the human adaptabil-
typically unknown in advance to the robot and it cannot
ity, with darker shades indicating higher probability for
be fully observed. In [8]–[10] we relax the assumption
smallervalues(lessadaptability).Thewhitecirclesdenote
of a known y for the human. Instead, we treat y as a
auniformdistributionoverhumanadaptability.Thetable
latent variable in a partially observable stochastic pro-
color indicates disagreement (red) or agreement (green)
cess,inparticularlyamixed-observabilityMarkovdecision
between human and robot actions. User 1 is inferred as
process, which has been shown to achieve significant
non-adaptable, whereas Users 2 and 3 are adaptable.
computational efficiency [2]. This allows the robotto take
information seeking actions to infer online the parameter
y, which specifies how the human policy πH is affected
by the robot’s own actions. As a result, human and robot the robot infers a distribution over goals based on the
mutually adapt to each other; the robot builds online a user input, and assists the user for that distribution [19].
model of how the human adapts to the robot by inferring Mutual adaptation additionally allows the robot to reason
their type y, and adapts its own actions in return. over how the user goal may change, as the user adapts
Weinstantiatedthemutualadaptationformalismusing themselves to the robot. In our example, the starting
as human type y the human adaptability, that is their user preference is for the robot to go towards the left
willingness to adapt to new strategy demonstrated the bottle, while the robot considers the right bottle as a
robot. Fig. 6 shows an instance of the mutual adaptation bettergoal,forinstancebecauseitisheavieranditshould
formalism in a shared autonomy setting. In this setting, be placed in the green bin first. The robot starts by

Task Performance Robot Trustworthiness
erocS
resU
Ropt
Rsub
erocS
Robotadaptationonly
Mutualadaptation
Noadaptation
erocS
ksaT
in human adaptation to the robot. Closing the loop
between the two results in mutual adaptation, where the
robot builds online a model of human adaptation, and
adapts its own actions in return.
5 We have applied the mutual adaptation formalism in
collaborative manipulation, social navigation and shared
4
autonomy settings. We have also been using the same
3 formalism to incorporate verbal communication between
the robot and the human [20]. We are excited about
2
generalizing our work in a variety of domains, robot
1 morphologies and interaction modalities, where an au-
Fig. 8: Results for the three conditions in our human tonomous system plans its actions by incorporating the
subjects experiment [9]. Robot-adaptation only: the robot human internal state. The number of applications is vast:
assisted the user on their preference. Mutual-adaptation: an autonomous car can infer the aggressiveness of a
The proposed formalism of Sec. V. No adaptation: The nearbydriverandchoosetowaitorproceed;aGPSsystem
robot goes to the optimal goal always ignoring the user. may infer whether a user is willing to follow its prompts;
Mutual-adaptation performs better than robot adaptation apersonalrobotathomecan“nudge”auserabouttaking
only, since a large number of users adapted to the robot, breaks and sleeping more.
while achieving comparable trust-ratings. No adaptation As these applications become more complex, our work
achieves the maximum performance by definition, but to has a number of limitations. The models of human in-
the detriment of reported user trust in the robot. ternal state that robots can build reliably are restricted
andachievingoptimalbehaviorinlarge,high-dimensional
spaces faces computational intractability. To this end,
moving straight (information-seeking action), observing flexible, compact representations of the human internal
whether the human changes their inputs to follow the state and new algorithms for reasoning about these rep-
robot (adaptable user), or insists on pushing the joystick resentations give much promise.
to the left (non-adaptable). If the human is adaptable Overall, we believe that we have brought about a
(bottom-row), the robot will guide them towards a better better understanding of different ways that probabilis-
way of doing the task. If the human is non-adaptable tic planning and game-theoretic algorithms can support
(top-row),therobotfollowsthehumanpreferencetowards principled reasoning in robotic systems that collaborate
the left-bottle, in order to retain their trust. Similarly, with people. We look forward to continue addressing the
Fig. 7 shows the MOMDP policy tree for a table-carrying exciting scientific challenges in this area.
task. The robot infers the user adaptability, and chooses
whether to move the table following the user’s initial REFERENCES
preference, or to guide the user towards moving the table
[1] AndreaThomaz,GuyHoffman,MayaCakmak,etal.Computational
intheoppositedirection.Ourexperimentsincollaborative
human-robot interaction. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics,
manipulation [8], social navigation [10] and shared au- 2016.
tonomy [9] settings showed that, when compared to one- [2] SylvieCWOng,ShaoWeiPng,DavidHsu,andWeeSunLee. Plan-
ning under uncertainty for robotic tasks with mixed observability.
way robot adaptation to the human, mutual adaptation
TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch,2010.
significantly improved human-robot team performance, [3] HannaKurniawati,DavidHsu,andWeeSunLee. Sarsop:Efficient
while achieving comparable trust ratings (Fig. 8). point-basedpomdpplanningbyapproximatingoptimallyreachable
beliefspaces. InRobotics:Scienceandsystems,2008.
VI. DISCUSSION [4] James Pita, Manish Jain, Fernando Ordónez, Christopher Portway,
MilindTambe,CraigWestern,PraveenParuchuri,andSaritKraus.
We presented a summary of our work in human- Using game theory for los angeles airport security. Ai Magazine,
robot collaboration. We formulated the general problem 2009.
asatwo-playergamewithincompleteinformation,where [5] Stefanos Nikolaidis and Julie Shah. Human-robot cross-training:
computational formulation, modeling and evaluation of a human
human and robot know each other’s goals. We then made
teamtrainingstrategy.InProceedingsoftheACM/IEEEInternational
a set of different assumptions and approximations within ConferenceonHuman-RobotInteraction(HRI),2013.
the scope of this general formulation. Each assumption [6] StefanosNikolaidis,PrzemyslawLasota,RamyaRamakrishnan,and
Julie Shah. Improved human–robot team performance through
resultedindiverseandexcitingteamcoordinationbehav-
cross-training,anapproachinspiredbyhumanteamtrainingprac-
iors, which had a strong effect on team performance. tices. TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch(IJRR),2015.
Wehaveshownthatrepresentingthehumanpreference [7] Stefanos Nikolaidis, Ramya Ramakrishnan, Keren Gu, and Julie
Shah.Efficientmodellearningfromjoint-actiondemonstrationsfor
as a human reward function unknown to the robot and
human-robot collaborative tasks. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE
computing the robot policy that maximizes this function InternationalConferenceonHuman-RobotInteraction(HRI),2015.
results in robot adaptation to the human. Assuming the [8] Stefanos Nikolaidis, Anton Kuznetsov, David Hsu, and Siddhartha
Srinivasa.Formalizinghuman-robotmutualadaptation:Abounded
human reward function to be known and treating the
memory model. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE International
interaction as an underactuated dynamical system results ConferenceonHuman-RobotInteraction(HRI),2016.

[9] Stefanos Nikolaidis, Yu Xiang Zhu, David Hsu, and Siddhartha
Srinivasa.Human-robotmutualadaptationinsharedautonomy.In
Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
RobotInteraction(HRI),2017.
[10] StefanosNikolaidis,DavidHsu,andSiddharthaSrinivasa. Human-
robotmutualadaptationincollaborativetasks:Modelsandexperi-
ments. TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch(IJRR),2017.
[11] Stefanos Nikolaidis, Swaprava Nath, Ariel D Procaccia, and Sid-
dharthaSrinivasa. Game-theoreticmodelingofhumanadaptation
in human-robot collaboration. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE
InternationalConferenceonHuman-RobotInteraction(HRI),2017.
[12] Daniel Kahneman. Maps of bounded rationality: Psychology for
behavioraleconomics. TheAmericaneconomicreview,93(5):1449–
1475,2003.
[13] ChristosHPapadimitriou. Thecomplexityoffindingnashequilib-
ria. AlgorithmicGameTheory,2007.
[14] Julie Shah, James Wiken, Brian Williams, and Cynthia Breazeal.
Improvedhuman-robotteamperformanceusingchaski,ahuman-
inspiredplanexecutionsystem. InProceedingsofthe6thinterna-
tional conference on Human-robot interaction, pages 29–36. ACM,
2011.
[15] Stefanos Nikolaidis, Przemyslaw Lasota, Gregory Rossano, Carlos
Martinez, Thomas Fuhlbrigge, and Julie Shah. Human-robot col-
laborationinmanufacturing:Quantitativeevaluationofpredictable,
convergent joint action. In International Symposium on Robotics
(ISR),2013.
[16] BrennaDArgall,SoniaChernova,ManuelaVeloso,andBrettBrown-
ing. Asurveyofrobotlearningfromdemonstration. Roboticsand
autonomoussystems,57(5):469–483,2009.
[17] Owen Macindoe, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomás Lozano-Pérez.
Pomcop:Beliefspaceplanningforsidekicksincooperativegames.
2012.
[18] Tirthankar Bandyopadhyay, Kok SungWon, Emilio Frazzoli, David
Hsu, Wee Sun Lee, and Daniela Rus. Intention-aware motion
planning.InAlgorithmicFoundationsofRoboticsX,pages475–491.
Springer,2013.
[19] ShervinJavdani,HennyAdmoni,StefaniaPellegrinelli,SiddharthaS
Srinivasa, and J Andrew Bagnell. Shared autonomy via hind-
sight optimization for teleoperation and teaming. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.00155,2017.
[20] Stefanos Nikolaidis, Minae Kwon, Jodi Forlizzi, and Siddhartha
Srinivasa. Planning with verbal communication for human-robot
collaboration. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction (JHRI), 2018.
(underreview).