20 November 2025
Mutual Adaptation and Influence: Survey of Latent
Dynamics Models in Human-Robot Interaction
1 1 2 1 1
Mason O. Smith , Sunny Amatya , Seyed Yousef Soltanian , Jonathan Bush , Wenlong Zhang
1. School of Manufacturing Systems and Networks, Arizona State University
2. School for Engineering of Matter, Transport and Energy, Arizona State University
Keywords
human-robot interaction, influence, latent dynamics, mutual adaptation, robotics and control
systems
Posted on 20 November 2025 — CC-BY 4.0 — This is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed. Data may be preliminary. — https://
doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.175459948.88124600/v2

Mutual Adaptation and Influence: Survey of Latent Dynamics
Models in Human-Robot Interaction
Mason O. Smith* Sunny Amatya Seyed Yousef Soltanian Jonathan Bush Wenlong Zhang
M. O. Smith, S. Amatya, J. Bush, W. Zhang
School of Manufacturing Systems and Networks
Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering
Arizona State University
Mesa, Arizona, USA
{mosmith3, samatya, jebush2, wenlong.zhang}@asu.edu
S. Y. Soltanian
School for Engineering of Matter, Transport and Energy
Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering
Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona, USA
ssoltan2@asu.edu
Keywords: Human-robot interaction, Influence, Latent dynamics, Mutual adaptation
Abstract:
Recent advances in robotics have enabled more dynamic and interactive roles when working with humans. This is partially afforded
by the use of latent states, which allow the robot to predict human actions in a compact and tractable way. This paradigm has al-
lowed robots not only to respond and adapt to human behavior but also to anticipate and plan proactively through the use of latent
dynamics models. This survey explores the use of such models in the field of human-robot interaction (HRI). Current works revealed
three classes of latent dynamics models: Bayesian, Markovian, and encoded. To connect these works, we synthesize a unified frame-
work consisting of a prediction and control step. This framework shows how the traditional one-way adaptation extends to mutually
adaptive behaviors by using latent dynamics in the prediction step. Similarly, we show how influence is an extension of mutual adap-
tation by using latent dynamics in the control step. We then review state-of-the-art approaches to mutual adaptation and influence
for the three latent dynamics classes and discuss emergent properties as they relate to application, update frequency, and specific
considerations for mutual adaptation or influence. Using this review, we highlight gaps in the current literature and propose future
directions.
ToC Figure: Robots are becoming better teammates by learning hidden patterns in how people act. This survey covers
how state of the art approaches leverage these patterns to help robots not only react, but also anticipate and guide cooper-
ation. Here, we synthesize a unifying framework for these approaches, classify and review existing works, and highlight key
trends and open challenges in this field.
1

1 Introduction
observe the human’s action in the previously observed state
s to estimate which door the human preferred, denoted
t−1
as θ . This estimate can then be used to modulate robot
With continued technological advances, the problem of col- t−1
behavior in the current state s .
laboration between humans and robots in complex tasks t
has risen to the forefront. In collaborative interactions, hu- However, the human will likely observe the interaction
mans and robots work together simultaneously on shared forces that the robot previously applied in s , similarly
t−1
tasks, where team performance can be improved by mod- to how the robot did in one-way adaptation. Consequently,
ifying the robot’s behavior to better coordinate with hu- the human may update their preferred door to θ based on
t
man actions [1]. To that end, it is essential for the robot this observation in order to adapt to the robot’s behavior,
not only to model the environment but also to model its which would make θ an outdated estimate. Thus, the
t−1
human partner. Providing a robot with a theory of mind robot acknowledging the human’s update and adapting its
(ToM)—the ability to reason about human beliefs, desires, behavior accordingly is referred to as mutual adaptation.
and goals—can significantly improve human-robot coordina- This affords the robot the ability to better anticipate the hu-
tion [2]. The standard approach to planning in this setting man’s preferred door in the upcoming interaction, compared
is to modify robot behavior in response to some latent state to one-way adaptation, thereby improving the robot’s action
that compactly represents the human’s policy. By estimat- planning.
ing the previous latent state from the previous interaction,
the robot can better predict the future behavior of the hu- Taking this one step further, we can exemplify influence,
man and plan supplemental actions [3]. We refer to this as where the robot takes a more active role in planning future
one-way adaptation, where the robot creates a new, one-shot team behavior by repeatedly reasoning about how the hu-
estimate at every timestep. man would adapt their preferred door in response to the
robot’s future interaction forces. Assume that the robot has
However, humans are often non-stationary and adapt to a vested interest in which door the table is carried through.
robot actions, which is a critical consideration for successful By using its model of how the human updates their prefer-
HRI [4]. The change in a human’s latent state over time de- ence in response to the robot’s actions, the robot can reason
pends on past interaction with the robot, as well as on their about what sequence of actions would lead the human to
previous latent state. We refer to the change of latent state prefer door θ′ instead of door θ after τ timesteps. The
t+τ t+τ
over time as latent dynamics. A robot can leverage latent robot could then take the corresponding sequence of actions
dynamics to better anticipate the latent state in the cur- to guide the human to prefer the door that better suits the
rent interaction by reasoning about how past robot actions robot’s needs (i.e., θ′ ).
t+τ
caused the previous latent state to evolve into the current
one. Consequently, the robot can then use the improved pre-
diction of the current latent state to plan actions that are 1.1 Objective
better coordinated. We refer to this as mutual adaptation,
which anticipates the current, unseen latent state—whereas Due to the use of latent dynamics being somewhat novel
one-way adaptation only estimates the previous latent state and the diversity of domains in HRI (e.g., human factors [7],
at best. AI [8], and controls [9]), researchers have implemented vary-
ing methods in several applications (e.g., autonomous ve-
Not only can latent dynamics be used to anticipate the hu-
hicles [10] and contact robots [11]) without a strong inter-
man’s current latent state, it can also be used iteratively
connecting theory. Consequently, there is a general lack of
during planning of future actions. Thus, applying a model
formalism for the distinction between mutual adaptation
of latent dynamics to robotic control extends mutual adap-
and influence, thereby causing these terms to often be used
tation to influence—a concept linked to improved perfor-
interchangeably.
mance in HRI [5]. Here, the robot incorporates latent dy-
namics into its control policy to anticipate how its actions The primary objective of this paper is to synthesize a unify-
will shape the human’s future latent state. By doing so, the ing framework for mutually adaptive and influential models
robot can guide the human to a latent state that results in from the existing literature on non-stationary humans with
a more desirable outcome. Although influence operates on latent dynamics models in HRI. This framework provides a
the human’s latent state, the objective may or may not in- clear system of organization in an attempt to reduce confu-
clude eliciting a particular latent state known in advance. sion caused by the conflation of these distinct approaches.
Consequently, influence emerges naturally from planning Secondly, we bring attention to state-of-the-art research in
with access to a latent dynamics model. this field while applying the proposed framework as an or-
ganizational tool. Thus, readers have access to a breadth
To further elaborate, consider the scenario in Figure 1,
of approaches spanning the full scope of the framework
where a robot and a human attempt to move a table through
such that they can easily access information that suits their
one of three doors. Knowing which door the human prefers
needs. Lastly, this review identifies future directions for this
(latent state) can help the robot predict the force the hu-
field in a way that is grounded and motivated through the
man will apply to move the table (action), so that the robot
reviewed works.
can plan its action accordingly. Accurate prediction of this
latent state is therefore essential for smooth and effective in- The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section
teraction. In the case of one-way adaptation, the robot can 2 provides the background information required to main-
2

Figure 1: A table carrying task (adapted from [6]) where the goal is for the human and robot to move a table through one
of three doors by jointly applying interactive forces (actions) to the table. In the previous state s , the human action
t−1
(black line from human) and robot action (orange line from robot) was observed and caused the human to update their
preferred door from θ (left door) to θ (middle door) in the upcoming interaction in s . The robot can form a prediction
t−1 t t
θˆ to deduce what it believes the human action will be (orange line from human) in s and plan an action that minimizes
t t
conflicting forces. In one-way adaptation, the robot uses the past human action in s to estimate the human’s pre-
t−1
vious door preference θˆ = θ . This is now incorrect as θ ̸= θ which causes the robot to incorrectly deduce human
t t−1 t t−1
action (misaligned orange and black arrows from human) and produce conflicting interaction forces (misaligned black
human arrow and orange robot arrow). In mutual adaptation, the robot now reasons about how its past action affects
θ to better anticipate θ . With the correct the prediction θˆ =θ , the robot can align its action in s (parallel black and
t−1 t t t t
orange lines). In influence, the robot can repeatedly apply this reasoning during planning to determine how a series of τ
actions (red or green arrows) lead to different door preferences (θ or θ′ ). The robot can then guide the human to a
t+τ t+τ
latent state that robot better optimizes its reward (i.e., θˆ′ ).
t+τ
tain a consistent discussion throughout the remainder of the two steps: 1) prediction: the robot attempts to predict
paper. Section 3 describes our proposed latent dynamics what θ can best be used to describe human policy and 2)
framework that unifies the mutual adaptation and influ- control: the robot attempts to find an optimal policy π∗ in
R
ence models for HRI. We then begin the review of relevant response to θ such that it optimizes its own reward.
works where we state the methodology in Section 4. In the
subsequent sections, we review Bayesian (Section 5), Marko-
vian (Section 6), and encoded (Section 7) latent dynamics 2.1 Interactive Setting
classes where we first provide formalism for each class and
then review how they are used for mutual adaptation or We consider HRI to evolve according to a transition model
influence in the field of HRI. Section 9 then discusses emer- s ∼ P(s ,aR ,aH ) where the state of the world at
t t−1 t−1 t−1
gent themes identified in these works and highlights future any timestep s is a function of the previous state s and
t t−1
directions and challenges. previous actions aR and aH of the robot and human,
t−1 t−1
respectively. Agent i’s actions ai are the output of their
t
policy π (s ,θ ) which is a function of state s and latent
i t t t
2 Preliminaries state θ . After the joint action {aR,aH} is performed, the
t t t
timestep is progressed t ← t+1 and an observation of the
states and actions o ←{s ,aR ,aH } is taken.
t−1 t−1 t−1 t−1
This section provides a brief overview of the concepts and
notation underlying the proposed unified framework, as
described in Section 3. In order to effectively coordinate, 2.1.1 Interaction Data
it is useful for the robot to have a model of human policy
π H to predict the human’s actions. However, the large di- The model for predicting latent state takes the observation
mensionality of π H can make learning a robotic policy π R from the previous timestep o t−1 to make a prediction of
intractable when conditioned directly on π H . Therefore, a the current human latent state θˆ t in the upcoming interac-
more compact representation of π H can be used instead, tion. These observations can be a one-step observation like
where each unique π H is described by a latent state θ ∈ Θ. {s t ,aR t ,aH t }, a trajectory of observations, or any arbitrary
The robotic planning problem can then be decomposed into dataset. Depending on the latent dynamic function, ϕ, dif-
3

2.2 Latent State Representation
ferent types of observations can be used. For example [6] 2.3 Latent State Dynamics
takes a one-step observation to update the latent state, [12]
takes the trajectory from the previous interaction, and [13] Latent state dynamics assert that the human’s latent state
takes a dataset to update their latent state. For the sake of evolves according to some functional ϕ(·) such that θˆ ←
t
generality, we use o t to represent any input in these forms. ϕ(θˆ t−1 ,·). We define the three latent dynamics classes that
describe how the robot models this update based on the
interaction data. While some conceptual overlaps may ex-
2.1.2 Prediction and Control Framework
ist between these classes, this review focuses on the exact
formulation and implementation of a model, instead of the
This framework first predicts the human’s latent state and
type of system that a model predicts, to remove ambigu-
then performs control optimization over a policy condi-
ity. Note that while some works choose to define the bi-
tioned on this prediction. The predictor takes in the previ-
directional nature of mutual adaptation as the human being
ous observation o and predicts the latent state θˆ for the
t−1 t adaptive to some robot latent state (e.g., robot intent [18]),
current timestep. Then, the control block finds an optimal
we generalize this in our model and assume that the robot’s
robot policy π∗ which maximizes the expected discounted
R latent state is implicitly encoded from o t−1 in the human la-
accumulated reward conditioned on the robot’s estimation
tent update ϕ without explicitly defining it (i.e. we skip the
of human latent state θˆ such that:
t step where the human first estimates robot latent state and
directly assert that the human updates their latent state
L from observations). The proposed framework could easily be
π R ∗ =argmax E
(cid:104)(cid:88)
γτR
(cid:16)
s t+τ ,π R ,π H (θˆ t )
(cid:17)(cid:105)
(1) modified to reflect this.
πR
τ=1
where τ ∈[1,L] is the time index for the unseen future inter-
actions during policy optimization, γ is a discounting factor, 3 Unified Framework
and R(·) is some reward function. Here, the time horizon L
differentiates the planning time index τ from the time index
of the current interactive episode t. Note that the policy
optimization is conditioned on the latent state θˆ which is
t
formulated differently between one-way adaptation, mutual
adaptation, and influence as shown in Figure 2. Further-
more, when the latent state update takes place (i.e. between
or within an interactive episode), determines how frequently
(1) is used to solve for π∗. We further discuss the latent
R
state in Section 2.2 and Section 2.3.
2.2 Latent State Representation
In a classical ToM setting, latent states represent an agent’s
mental state, such as intent, beliefs, and desires [2]. Judg-
ments about the other’s latent states dictate how we under-
stand and remember others’ actions, how we respond, and
what we predict about their future actions [14]. This con-
cept of latent states has also been expanded into computer
science as feature embeddings, which capture the essential
features of input data in a lower-dimension space [15].
Latent state representations can be either explicit or im-
plicit [16]. Explicit representations describe latent states Figure 2: The proposed prediction and control framework
that have a practical description within the task (e.g., nav- showing how one-way adaptation extends to mutual adap-
igation goal [17], reach objective [18], and sorting pref- tation and mutual adaptation to influence. Changes to the
erences [17]) or about an agent (e.g., adaptability [19], model from the preceding approach are shown by the bolded
trust [20], and knowledge [21]). Implicit representations boxes. The difference between one-way and mutual adap-
describe latent states that have no semantic meaning and tation is that the latent state prediction of θˆ t = θ t−1 from
are behavioral encodings that maximize predictive accu- Estimate(·) is improved to the more accurate prediction
racy. While some implicit features may encode semantically θˆ t = θ t by using the latent dynamics function ϕ(·) during
meaningful states, we do not consider them as explicit un- the prediction step. Mutual adaptation extends to influence
less the values themselves have semantic meaning. In the by now incorporating ϕ(·) into policy optimization during
reviewed works, implicit representations are mostly seen in the control step.
autoencoding frameworks such as [22].
In this section, we introduce the proposed framework by
4

3.1 One-Way Adaptation
first formalizing one-way adaptation. Then, we show how on an outdated prediction of the latent state which results
mutual adaptation is a natural extension by considering in a suboptimal strategy.
that the human’s latent state evolves according to a latent
Referring back to our toy example in Figure 1, in one-way
dynamics model during the prediction step. Furthermore,
adaptation, although the robot tries to estimate the hu-
we show how influence is an extension of mutual adaptation
man’s preferred door based on the previous observations, it
by considering latent dynamics during the control step. In
does not consider that this door could have changed since
short, both mutual adaptation and influence utilize latent
the last interaction due to the human adapting to robot
dynamics, but mutual adaptation focuses on improving one-
actions. Consequently, this would cause the robot to inaccu-
step predictions of the current latent state, while influence
rately predict human actions and plan poorly coordinated
recursively incorporates these predictions into planning in
interaction forces.
an attempt to guide the human to a more desirable future
latent state.
3.2 Mutual Adaptation
3.1 One-Way Adaptation
For a robot to adapt to a non-stationary human partner,
it may not be sufficient to estimate what their latent state
Substantial research has been done on one-way robot adap-
was in the previous interaction. Therefore, it can be crucial
tation to humans. Conceptually, “one-way” refers to the
to anticipate what their latent state will be in the current
unidirectional adaptation of the robot to the human (i.e.
interaction to predict how their behavior changed since the
even though they may do so, the human is not modeled as
last observation. In other words, it may be necessary to
adapting their strategy in response to robot actions). Esti-
consider human adaptation in response to robot actions
mating the human’s desired direction of motion from previ-
when planning robot behavior.
ous state velocities [23] and task-level plans from previously
applied forces [24] would be considered one-way adaptation Mutual adaptation occurs when both agents update their
as they only consider previous state or human action while control policies in relation to their partner’s behavior to ful-
neglecting the effect that the robot action had on the cur- fill team or individual goals [26]. For the purpose of this re-
rent latent state. view, we define mutual adaptation as leveraging the human’s
latent dynamics to better predict (anticipate) the unobserved
During the prediction step in one-way adaptation, the latent
latent state in the upcoming interaction, thus allowing the
state of the human is estimated online based on previous
robot to adapt its control algorithm accordingly. This com-
observations as in (2).
plies with other definitions of mutual adaptation [6,26,27].
θˆ =Estimate(o ) (2)
t t−1 While mutual adaptation has been formulated as an emer-
gent feature of one-way adaptation as in [28], we only use
where the Estimate(·) function can be any estimation pro-
the term mutual adaptation when the robot is benefiting
cess (e.g., maximum likelihood estimation [25]).
from implementing latent dynamics in the prediction step
Consider the standard one-way Bayesian estimate of la- only, as seen by the bolded box in mutual adaptation’s pre-
tent state: the robot models its belief over human features diction step in Figure 2. Conversely, the use of latent dy-
bR(θ), which is a robotic reasoning mechanism (inference). namics in the control step would instead satisfy our later
t
In contrast, modeling the human as performing a Bayesian definition for influence in Sec. 3.3.
estimate over robot features is considered a latent dynam-
In mutual adaptation models, it is assumed that the hu-
ics model, since it is instead modeling a human reasoning
man’s latent state θ changes according to a latent dynamics
mechanism. The key distinguishing factor here is where the t
function ϕ(·) in response to the previous observations o
Bayesian update is located: in the robot’s mind (modeling t−1
containing, in part, past robot actions. Having access to ϕ
the human) or in the human’s mind (modeling the world
will allow anticipation of the human’s latent state and their
and/or robot). Thus, simply having the robot attempt to
policy at the current timestep, consequently solving the
find which θ is most likely to be true (i.e. best describes
aforementioned issue of one-way adaptation (i.e. θˆ ≈θ ).
o ) without modeling how the human arrived at θ implies t t−1
t−1 t A general way to express the latent update ϕ(·) is:
that (2) does not satisfy the requirements for the aforemen-
tioned latent dynamics classes.
θˆ ←ϕ(θˆ |o ) (3)
An important characteristic of one-way adaptation is that, t t−1 t−1
without a model of latent dynamics, the best prediction of
Using the improved prediction in (3), relative to one-way
the human’s latent state is the one that describes previous
interactions such that θˆ = θ . In other words, there is adaptation, to anticipate latent state will then provide a
t t−1
more accurate solution to the policy optimization problem
a one-step time delay in the prediction step for one-way
adaptation, causing an inaccurate prediction θˆ ̸= θ when in (1).
t t
the human is sufficiently non-stationary (i.e. the human Here, θˆ is predicted from (3) at the current timestep t and
t
agent adapts to robot actions and changes their latent state
is fixed during the policy optimization time horizon τ ∈
between timesteps). As a result, the subsequent control step
[1,L]. Key to mutual adaptation, the control step is now
will attempt to solve (1) to find a robot policy conditioned
5

3.3 Influence
solved over a fixed θˆ ≈θ instead of θˆ ≈θ as in one-way dynamics function as a means to explore and exploit the
t t t t−1
adaptation. modeled system (i.e. world and latent state dynamics) to
better maximize its expected reward. Naturally, the robot
Returning to our table-carrying example in Figure 1, the
objective can be defined to induce a specific latent state for
human may adapt to previous robotic interaction forces by
the human as in [29], but this is not required for influence
changing their preferred door from the left door θ to the
t−1 to occur.
middle door θ . By anticipating this change, the robot can
t
more appropriately adapt its actions to reduce conflicting In summary, the robot can now repeatedly reason about ϕ(·)
interaction forces that would otherwise occur when apply- in the same way that mutual adaptation did to anticipate
ing one-way adaptation due to the robot’s estimate of the the current θˆ during influence’s control step in (4). Now,
t
human’s preferred door being θˆ ≈ θ ̸≈ θ . As a result, recall the example of the collaborative table carrying task
t t−1 t
in mutual adaptation, the robot can better respond to the in Figure 1. This modification yields the ability to evaluate
human’s adaptive behavior by correctly predicting the mid- how a sequence of robotic interaction forces can alter the
dle door as the human’s current preference (i.e. θˆ ≈ θ ) to human’s preferred door in the future θˆ . Thus, the robot
t t t+τ
improve coordination. has the opportunity to explore different possible latent state
outcomes and “choose” the latent state that best suits its
needs. Given that the rightmost door has a higher payoff
3.3 Influence
for the robot, the robot will naturally learn to influence
the human’s preferred door during policy optimization to
Expanding on mutual adaptation, influence takes the idea of realize this superior payoff. For example, the robot may
anticipating the human’s current latent state a step further learn to apply large interaction forces to the right early in
by repeatedly applying the same logic during the control the interaction to elicit the human to prefer the rightmost
step. Thus, we have a model of how the human latent state door in the future. Thus, this small change of allowing θˆ
t+τ
will evolve given a series of future actions which, in turn, to evolve according to ϕ(·) during policy optimization can
affords the robot the ability to optimize a policy that guides achieve a large change in policy.
the human to a latent state that better supports robot ob-
For the purpose of this review, we only consider a robot to
jectives.
be influential if it explicitly models latent dynamics dur-
For the purpose of this review, we will define influence as ing policy optimization (4). Therefore, influence must be
leveraging the human’s latent dynamics in robotic planning intentional and modeled within robotic planning. This ex-
(control step) to generate observations such that the hu- cludes more passive means for influence such as an unpow-
man is guided to a latent state that better optimizes expected ered robot “influencing” the path of a human walking by or,
robot reward. Our definition is most similar to “the ego more realistically, methods such as [18] that promote legible
agent learns to generate interactions...which lead the other motion without modeling how such robot actions shape the
agent to adopt future latent strategies that the ego agent human’s latent dynamics toward certain states.
can exploit for higher rewards” that is provided in [22], but
is generally compliant with descriptions provided in other
reviewed works. 3.4 Summary
Influence has two prerequisites: 1) we have a sufficiently
This paper aims to demonstrate how the latent dynamics
accurate model of the human’s latent dynamics and 2)
function ϕ(·) is utilized in various HRI tasks, enabling re-
that the robot has the means to take a sequence of actions
searchers to implement mutual adaptation or influence
{aR,...,aR ,...,aR } that generate a set of observations
t t+τ t+L within our proposed framework. The distinction between
{o ,...,o ,...,o } used by the human during their latent
t t+τ t+L mutual adaptation and influence arises from the way ϕ(·) is
state update (i.e. the system is at least partially control-
integrated into the prediction and control steps. It is impor-
lable).
tant to note that the proposed framework is agnostic to the
Formally, we will describe this by extending the mutual latent dynamics class and the policy solution method used
adaptation model in Section 3.2 to arrive at our model of in the control step.
policy optimization for influence:
The latent dynamics function can be implemented using a
π R ∗ =argmax E
(cid:104)(cid:88) L
γτR
(cid:16)
s t+τ ,π R ,π H (θˆ t+τ )
(cid:17)(cid:105) v
re
a
p
ri
r
e
e
t
s
y
en
o
t
f
a
m
tio
e
n
th
s.
od
T
s
h
,
i
w
s
h
c
i
o
c
n
h
si
w
st
e
s
r
o
e
f
fe
b
r
o
t
t
o
h
a
t
s
ra
l
d
at
it
e
i
n
o
t
na
d
l
y
c
n
o
a
n
m
tr
ic
o
s
l
πR
τ=1
(4)
approaches [30] and modern deep reinforcement learning
s.t. θˆ ←ϕ(θˆ |o ) methods used in many of our reviewed works. While we
t+τ t+τ−1 t+τ−1
briefly discuss how these approaches incorporate ϕ(·), we
Here, the online prediction step (anticipation) is identical to
refer the reader to [31,32] for a more in-depth exploration
mutual adaptation as described in (3). The key difference
of these techniques in robotics and HRI. Additionally, we
between influence and mutual adaptation is that θˆ is now
t+τ examine various methods for modeling the latent dynamics
subject to ϕ(·) and is time-varying during the control step’s
function ϕ(·), ranging from simple hand-crafted functions to
policy optimization. This is what gives influence its emer-
autoencoders, Bayesian networks, recurrent neural networks
gent property [22]. The policy optimization in (4) is still op-
(RNNs), transformers, and more. However, our primary
timizing for the robot reward R(·) and only uses the latent
6

focus is on how these latent state dynamics modeling ap- classes can be found in Sections 5, 6 and 7 respec-
proaches are integrated into different HRI tasks, their role tively.
in capturing human behavior, and how they are used for
• Latent Dynamics Representation: Within each
mutual adaptation or influence. Therefore, we consider de-
latent dynamics class, we further organize works ac-
tailed discussion of exact methods for solving the control
cording to their specific model and implementation, as
step (e.g., deep reinforcement learning algorithms) to be
introduced in Section 3.4. We go deeper and describe
largely out of scope.
a unique set of models and methods for each class.
• Latent State Representation: Furthermore, we
4 Review Methodology
motivate the use of latent state and its formulation in
Section 2.2 where we define two types of latent state
representations: implicit and explicit.
For our review purposes we searched Google Scholar and
four popular databases: Scopus, IEEE Xplore, Science Di- • Update Frequency: We further discuss papers based
rect and Springer Link. We used the search terms of “adap-
on when the update of the latent state is applied with
tion” or “influence” in fields of “human-(robot/machine/
respect to the interaction. Depending on the applica-
AI/automation /multi-agent),” with additional keywords
tion, this latent state update can occur within a single
“latent,” “intent,” and “latent dynamics” in the article ab-
interactive episode (e.g., at each time step of the in-
stract, title, or author specified keywords to target articles
teraction) or between repeated interactions, where the
with a ToM framework.
entire previous interaction episode may influence the
human’s latent state in the next one.
As the field has yet to agree upon a precise set of termi-
nology, works may apply latent dynamics models in their
algorithms but not refer to them by name. We attempted The justification for using these dimensions to discuss each
to mitigate the impact of this by performing an additional approach stems from the following rationale: Models of
breadth-first search of works in the first round of articles how human latent state evolves fit into one of three distinct
meeting our selection criteria. latent dynamics classes that describe the underlying
structure and assumptions of varying methods [33]. How-
The selection criteria for articles are as follows:
ever, the exact implementation (i.e., latent dynamics rep-
resentation) can vary within each latent dynamics class
• Must be applicable to HRI tasks. Application-specific
and was found to motivate use of certain latent state rep-
approaches that do not reflect the dynamic nature
resentations [16]. Lastly, we found that the timing of the
of HRI, such as multi-robot interaction, were not in-
dynamics update yielded significantly different results in
cluded.
real-world applications [34].
• Must utilize a physically or virtually embodied robotic For the reader’s reference, a summary of the aforementioned
agent, able to act in the environment independently dimensions classifying the reviewed works is provided in
(e.g., purely text-based chatbots do not qualify). To Table 1. A more detailed discussion of these dimensions will
allow for socially assistive robots, we do not require then be provided in Sections 5, 6, and 7.
direct physical interaction between the human and
robot [21].
4.1 Limitations
• Must explicitly use a latent dynamics model for the
human within the robotic planning framework.
This review focuses specifically on mutual adaptation and
• Must explicitly use some representation of latent hu- influence methods that leverage explicit modeling of latent
man state, although exact terminology may vary. dynamics. Although outside the scope of this review, there
are other methods of achieving directed mutual adaptation
and influence: reward manipulation and explicit design of
After filtering by the selection criteria, we uncovered a to-
heuristic influence measures [37], explicit announcement of
tal of 51 papers that fulfill the goals of this review. The
intent [72], information sharing [73], online learning [74],
qualifying works were then evaluated along the following
logic-based planning [75], sampling-based or data-driven
dimensions:
modeling with latent dynamics [76,77]. The remainder of the
paper is organized based on latent dynamics class (Bayesian
• Approach: The focus of this survey is to review two
in Section 5, Markovian in Section 6, and encoded in in
approaches to applying latent dynamic models in HRI:
Section 7), where we first describe the model by highlight-
mutual adaptation and influence.
ing the strengths and limitations and then review relevant
• Latent Dynamics Class: Latent dynamics model works for that class as it is applied to mutual adaptation
and influence.
non-stationary humans with an evolving latent state.
In our review, we have identified three distinct classes
of latent dynamics functions: Bayesian, Markovian,
and encoded dynamics. Formal definitions of these
7

Table 1: Taxonomy of Latent Dynamics Dimensions
Dynamics Update Class Approach Representation Frequency Citations
naiseyaB Mutual BeliefUpdate Within [35,36]
Adaptation
BeliefUpdate Between [37,38,39]
Influence BeliefUpdate Within [18,40,41,42]
vokraM
FixedFunction Between [43] Mutual
Adaptation FixedFunction Within [30,44,45,46]
TransitionMatrix Within [6,19,26,47]
Beta-Distribution Between [48]
Beta-Distribution Within [49,50]
Influence FixedFunction Between [51,52]
LinearGaussianSystem Between [53]
LinearGaussianSystem Within [20,54,55]
TransitionMatrix Within [21,56,57,58]
dedocnE
where ϕ := BeliefUpdate for Bayesian latent dynamics.
Here, the Bayesian belief update can be carried out with a
singular observation from a previous timestep [35] or collec-
tion of observed trajectories [78].
An important note discussed in Figure 3 is that the predic-
tion of latent state θˆ is directly expressed as the human’s t
new belief distribution bH(x) at time t such that θˆ :=bH(x) t t t
Consequently, the set of possible latent states Θ contains all
feasible human belief distributions.
Here, we strictly maintain that the human is a Bayesian
learner and is not concerned with robotic reasoning mecha-
nisms (e.g., Bayesian inference of human intent by the robot
Autoencodera Between [59,60] is not a sufficient condition for Bayesian latent dynamics).
Autoencodera Within [10,61,62] Consequently, all Bayesian latent dynamics models assert
Mutual FixedApproximator Within [11,63]
Adaptation PredictiveNetwork Within [64,65] that the human performs the belief update in (5). We will
Transformer Between [17] refer to this latent dynamics representation as belief update.
Transformer Within [66]
Autoencodera Between [13,22,29,67] Modeling the human with Bayesian dynamics provides the
Autoencodera Within [68,69]
simplest and most direct of the reviewed models as there
Influence PredictiveNetwork Between [70]
PredictiveNetwork Within [71] is no learning or training involved in the update rule. How-
Transformer Within [12] ever, such a simple dynamics model with a fixed procedure
aautoencodersaretheonlydynamicsrepresentationthataffordimplicitlatentstate
representation. Allothermodelsuseanexplicitlatentstaterepresentation. comes with some limitations. Computationally, Bayesian
models may struggle to be tractable in high-dimensional
latent spaces due to the belief on every latent state need-
ing to be updated in each transition. We also observe that
the outcome of a transition is highly dependent on prior
belief. While a prior can be a powerful feature to integrate
pre-existing information, a poor choice of prior can lead to
misinterpretation of new evidence and degrade the model.
Next, Bayes rule relies on fixed and rational assumptions
about the probabilistic relationship between variables which
Figure 3: Given a stream of observations o , a Bayesian limits its ability to personalize the dynamics to different
t
latent dynamics model for the human consists of them types of humans. For example, humans have a tendency to
updating their belief distribution bH(x) over a set of aux- resist change in their belief (i.e., confirmation bias [79]) and
t
iliary features x using observations o as evidence in suboptimally weight or interpret new evidence based on its
t−1
their BeliefUpdate(·). The robot typically directly adopts availability or recency [80]. Similarly, Bayesian latent state
the human belief distribution as the current latent state dynamics is only relevant when modeling the human’s belief
θˆ :=bH(x) at every timestep. about something other than themselves and is thus limited
t t
in the types of latent states it can describe.
5 Bayesian Latent Dynamics
5.1 Bayesian Mutual Adaptation
Here, it is assumed that the human maintains a belief bH(x)
t
which is modeled as a probability distribution over a set of One way to model the human’s latent dynamics in a mutual
features x ∈x at time t. These features can describe either adaptation setting is by assuming that the human performs
k
some characteristic of the world or their robotic partner a Bayesian update to recover their new belief according to
where the distribution over bH(x) evolves with t based on (6). The examples of using the Bayesian latent dynamics
t
some observation o , as seen by the sequences of blocks model in mutual adaptation scenarios can be found in [35,
t−1
in Figure 3. Based on o , the agent performs a Bayesian 36] where both articles use an explicit representation of
t−1
belief update on bH (x) to form a new belief distribution the human’s latent state and update their latent dynamics
t−1
bH(x) using Bayes rule for each x : model within interactive episodes.
t k
bH(x |o )∝P(o |x )bH (x ) (5) In [36], in a multi-agent interaction scenario, the “intimacy
t k t−1 t−1 k t−1 k
of the partner” has been used as an explicit latent state,
which refers to the human agent’s friendliness toward the
From the human’s perspective, given o which consists of
t−1
ego agent in a game-theoretic framework. A Bayesian net-
the observed states and joint-actions, the belief update at
work was utilized and trained using expectation maximiza-
time t is a deterministic function of the prior belief bH (x).
t−1 tion of the observations to update a friendliness parame-
As a shorthand for this deterministic computation, we write:
ter. The approach’s effectiveness was examined in a mutual
bH ←BeliefUpdate(bH |o ). (6) adaptation task (an iterative prisoner’s dilemma game) by
t t−1 t−1
8

5.2 Bayesian Influence
showing how the predicted friendliness from the latent dy- where a robot attempts to provide modified observations
namics model increases with each iteration as the agents get to a Bayesian human to better align their belief about the
to know each other. world state with the true world state in a driving task such
that humans could be influenced towards more optimal be-
Similar approaches have also been used for human intent
haviors.
recognition tasks [35] where the human intention in an HRI
task has been modeled as a sequence of latent states of an
evolving hidden Markov model which was first trained on
6 Markovian Latent Dynamics
observed data using Baum-Welch algorithm. The human
intention was recognized as the most likely latent state se-
quence based on the output of the Bayesian update using
the recent observations. The success of the approach was
shown by the positive self-report of the participants in a
collaborative assembly task with the robot.
5.2 Bayesian Influence
Applied repeatedly during planning in the control step, the
robot can find a way to optimally influence human belief
Figure 4: Given a stream of observations o , a Markovian
such that the series of beliefs bH (x), ∀ τ ∈ [1,L] bet- t
t+τ latent dynamics model consists of the human stochasti-
ter allows the robot to optimize its reward over some time
cally transitioning between singular latent states θˆ with
horizon. This mechanism of planning over the human’s in- t
probability p determined by their observation o . Here the
ference is often referred to as inference inversion [41]. t t
human only follows a single process and occupies one latent
We refer to this process as Bayesian influence, which is typi- state at a time in reality but the robot can probabilistically
cally used when the human is updating their belief about a reason about which process has occurred to form a belief
latent state describing their robotic partner. This can take distribution over Θ.
the form of the human’s belief over robot goals [18,38,42],
reward [37,39], or internal state [40,41]. We observe that Markovian latent dynamics assert that the human’s la-
all Bayesian influence approaches model dynamics over an tent update ϕ maintains the Markovian property: the la-
explicit latent state, as human belief must be contextual- tent state θ depends only on the previous latent state θ
t t−1
ized within a representative feature. Generally, the goal of and some observation o . Hence the dynamics of a latent
t−1
Bayesian influence is to better align human belief with real- Markovian system can expressed as:
ity [70], increase human understanding of robot actions, or
improve team performance [18,38,39,42]. However, it can θˆ t ←f(θˆ t−1 |o t−1 ) (7)
also be done to promote certain perceptions of robot char-
where ϕ:=f for Markovian latent dynamics models.
acteristics, such as attention [41] or trust [40]. Of particular
note is the concept of legible motion, where the robot seeks Here, the human is assumed to occupy a single unknown
to generate motion that allows a Bayesian human to better latent state at any time, and to transition between discrete
infer the robot’s navigation goal [18,38]. Here, successful latent states in a stochastic manner. In other words, the
influence can be verified by showing more accurate human human can only follow a single Markovian process, as shown
prediction of robot actions or by showing the correspond- in Figure 4.
ing latent state change through self-report measures (e.g.,
increased trust from post-test surveys [40]). Alternatively, Again, this classification only applies to the human latent
in [37], the authors take the opposite objective and attempt dynamics model and not to robotic reasoning mechanisms.
to increase uncertainty in the human’s belief of robot goals For example, Bayesian inference methods can estimate pa-
between interactions by injecting entropy into robot actions. rameters that specify a Markovian human transition func-
This was done to better maintain long-term influence be- tion (p t in Figure 4) or reason probabilistically about what
tween interactions, which would otherwise degrade once Markovian process the human followed. These methods
the human learns to anticipate the robot’s actions. These would maintain the Markovian latent dynamics classifica-
authors verified that their approach better maintained long- tion as they still assert that the human follows a Markovian
term influence in an intersection-type task by being able to transition, albeit with some uncertainty about exactly which
influence the human to insist on going first less frequently. process is being followed.
Influencing human belief about the robot, particularly about These transitions in Markovian dynamics can be either
robot goals, is likely more popular than attempting to in- stochastic or deterministic. To further clarify, we use the
fluence beliefs about the world due to a greater ability to term “Markov” to describe the memoryless quality of these
control latent state with robot actions and its compliance models; hence, while Figure 4 depicts a stochastic process,
with a ToM framework. However, influencing a Bayesian first-order deterministic models like [30] can still be classi-
human’s belief about the external world is shown in [70], fied under Markovian dynamics in this review.
9

6.1 Markovian Mutual Adaptation
While all Markovian latent dynamics can be expressed as that encodes the probability of transition from the current
a transition matrix, we will focus on organizing them ac- latent state to the next one [6,19,26,47].
cording to methods for recovering transition probabilities.
Many works in physical HRI (pHRI) have utilized a game-
First, this can be done by directly learning transition ma-
theoretic framework to construct a deterministic Marko-
trix entries from data with methods like the Baum-Welch
vian latent dynamic representation (e.g., a first-order dy-
algorithm [81]. We will refer to this latent dynamics rep-
namic) [30,45,46]. The importance of relying on a determin-
resentation as a transition matrix. Alternatively, one may
istic latent dynamic in the mentioned works is that it allows
choose to specify transition probabilities to follow a Marko-
for the application of optimal control-based approaches to
vian function that constrains these transition probabilities.
demonstrate performance guarantee (e.g., Lyapunov stabil-
These include beta-distribution, linear Gaussian system, or
ity) or to formulate update rules for modeling human behav-
fixed functions . The latter refers to custom-designed func-
ior (e.g., through coupled Riccati equations [30]). Based on
tions that do not learn or fit model parameters from data.
the dynamic game’s coupled nature and the human agent’s
Once a transition function is defined, Markovian latent dy- optimality assumptions, [30,45,46] have successfully gener-
namics are the most computationally efficient of the re- ated latent dynamics functions that update the latent state
viewed latent update procedures. However, the inherent within interactions. In this framework, the latent state is
assumption in all types of Markovian latent dynamics is represented explicitly as either the human’s control gains
that the system cannot account for the history of the la- during the physical task [30] or the amount of human con-
tent state (i.e., memoryless) and thus cannot model long- tribution in a cooperative game played between the human
term dependencies. Depending on the latent state, this may and the robot. Based on the reviewed works [30,45,46], this
be a limiting factor as there may be many latent systems game theoretic interactive framework allows for representing
in real-world HRI that are not Markovian (e.g., fatigue or the latent dynamics in different task-specific ways. In [30],
mood does not depend solely on your state one minute ago). the authors modeled a coupled physical interaction using a
Most commonly, Markovian latent dynamics are specified by dynamic game by considering the human and the robot as
some constraining function that is either manually authored two players, each minimizing their corresponding cost func-
(i.e., fixed functions) or has learnable parameters. These tion. This formulation resulted in two coupled Riccati equa-
approaches require a degree of prior knowledge about the tions for each player; then, they proposed an update rule
latent system such that the constraining function’s assump- to represent the latent dynamics for predicting the human
tions are not invalidated. However, functions with learn- matrix solution to their Riccati equation within interactions
able parameters (e.g., beta distribution [48,49,50]) may be and consequently anticipated the human’s control gain.
more flexible in describing real humans but require a mod-
In [43], another game-theoretic formulation has been used
est dataset to learn from. Without some prior knowledge,
to model the human as a partially adaptable agent to the
Markovian dynamics may instead solely rely on learning
robot in a table-clearing task. It was assumed that the hu-
transition probabilities from data (e.g., Baum-Welch algo-
man was unaware of the robot’s payoff function entities at
rithm). However, this comes at the cost of a higher data
the beginning of the task and might learn those entities
requirement, such that every latent state transition in the
after each set of interactions with a probability of α and
system is observed a sufficient number of times to define a
might not learn it with a probability of 1 − α (partially
probability. Thus, there are a spectrum of approaches to
adaptable). The human understanding of the robot’s payoff
Markovian latent dynamics that balance the trade-off be-
entities can be understood as the latent state, and the prob-
tween limitations of prior knowledge and available training
ability function of learning the entities can be understood
data.
as the latent dynamics in this framework. Compared to the
previously mentioned game-theoretic approach that updates
6.1 Markovian Mutual Adaptation the latent state within interactions, the latent state update
in this work occurs between each set of interactions.
Markovian latent dynamics models focus on anticipating the The above-proposed models were validated by their suc-
current latent state θˆ t directly based on the previous latent cess in predicting human behavior [43] or by improving the
state θˆ t−1 according to (7). The key feature of these models overall human-robot performance [30,45]. However, game the-
is their Markovian property, which makes them a convenient oretic or optimal control formulations of HRI often rely on
choice for mutual adaptation tasks as they rely on predict- strong assumptions about human rationality or full knowl-
ing the next latent state only based on the current time edge of cost functions which may be limiting, but also afford
information. analysis of convergence guarantees as in [30].
Two approaches to representing the latent dynamics func- To address the above-mentioned problems, partially observ-
tion were observed among the reviewed Markovian mutual able Markov decision processes (POMDPs) [82] and mixed
adaptation models. The first approach relies on the task- observability Markov decision processes (MOMDPs) [83]
specific latent dynamics representation that uses high-level have been used to reason about uncertainties regarding hu-
information regarding the task (e.g., trust models) [43,44]. man intentions [84]. In [6,19,26], a MOMDP framework has
We will call these Markovian models the “fixed function” been used to model the mutual adaptation task and struc-
dynamic representation. The second approach is to con- ture the latent dynamics setting. In [6,19,26], the authors
struct the latent dynamics in the form of a transition matrix have introduced the bounded-memory adaptation model
10

6.2 Markovian Influence
(BAM) to capture human adaptive behaviors. The BAM This is because trust is “significantly influenced by trust at
assumes that the human operates in one of several collabora- the previous moment” [86], which satisfies the Markovian
tion “modes” and adapts the behavior by switching among property, and is critical for maintaining effective interaction
the modes based on their decision to adapt to the robot or online by preventing over or under-reliance [87]. The latter
resist the robot’s decision. The human adaptability level, criteria implies that trust would benefit from actively mod-
which is the probability of switching from one collaborative ulating (influencing) trust, not just mutually adapting to it.
mode to another, is a BAM model parameter unknown to The trust-influence problem is applied so that the robot can
the robot a priori. Basically, BAM represents the latent modulate human trust to align it appropriately with robotic
dynamics as a transition matrix that captures human adapt- capabilities.
ability and predicts the next latent state (the collaboration
In the reviewed trust-influence works, a trust dynamics
mode) within interactions based on the current latent state
model is typically used to constrain the full Markovian dy-
and the adaptability level. In [26], the BAM model was in-
namics. The authors in [51,52] used a fixed function based
tegrated into a POMDP. However, MOMDPs have been
on the explicability of robot actions. Alternatively, one may
shown to have high computational efficiency in motion plan-
specify a constrained transition function with a model with
ning tasks compared to POMDPs [26,85].
learned parameters. An example of this is using the Beta-
Another use of transition matrices for representing human distribution to model trust evolution where model parame-
latent dynamics in a mutual adaptation task can be seen ters are recovered using a gradient decent algorithm either
in [47], where human intent is considered as an explicit la- between [48] or within [49,50] an interaction. A linear Gaus-
tent state. The authors of this work provide an intent pre- sian system trust model was also used in [20,53,54,55] where
diction framework using transition matrix modeling of the model parameters were recovered using Bayesian inference
latent dynamics to update the latent state prediction within using Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) sampling [88]. All
interactions. The authors proposed a Bayesian generative of these trust dynamics models apply their respective con-
model for social navigation that generalizes a popular class straints by informing the Markovian system of how trust is
of deterministic multi-agent motion models (in navigation) impacted by robot capability or other relevant features [86].
and is capable of encoding traffic agents in probabilistic A parameterized Markovian function is commonly imple-
space. Their model learning was formulated as a maximum mented due to the balance between the integration of prior
likelihood estimation problem, maximizing the marginal like- trust evolution information that constrains the Markovian
lihood by integrating out the latent dynamical states from transition and the personalization provided from learning
the joint probability of the complete data (observed and la- model parameters. However, one work did choose to am-
tent). Notably, they showed that their algorithm’s inference biguously learn the trust transition matrix directly from
run time scaled linearly with task complexity. data (i.e., no constraining trust model) [57] using an ex-
tended Baum-Welch algorithm [81]. In all cases except for
Modeling human trust as an explicit latent state in mutual
fixed function approaches, a data prior may be a limiting in
adaptation tasks is also a common way of anticipating hu-
such settings as collecting labeled transitions requires costly
man behavior during interactions [19,26,44]. An example
interventions like trust surveys.
of using trust models as a Markovian latent dynamics rep-
resentation in mutual adaptation can be seen in [44] where, This trust-influence problem is often solved as a trust-MDP
inspired by the time series human-to-robot trust model [86], [49,50,51,52,57] which asserts that trust is the state of
a fixed function dynamics model for predicting human-robot the system. Similarly, [20,55] proposed the trust-POMDP
mutual trust has been proposed. This model was used in model where trust dynamics are modeled as a linear Gaus-
a (semi)autonomous underwater robot control task where sian system and is nested within the cumulative POMDP
the robot updated the trust parameter prediction within transition dynamics. Solving the trust-POMDP under this
interactions and decided whether to switch between the tele- trust dynamics model allows the robot to modulate appro-
operated and autonomous mode to fulfill the objective in a priate trust to achieve effective interaction as in [53], where
mutual adaptation task with the human operator. the authors used this framework for trust-based navigation
of autonomous vehicles where trust dynamics are modeled
between interactions. In [54], the authors extend this lin-
6.2 Markovian Influence ear Gaussian system in the trust-POMDP model by im-
plementing a sparse Gaussian process to address dynamic
Next, we will look at how existing works use Markovian la- robot capabilities to improve accuracy in the trust evolution
tent dynamics to influence the human. It is important to model within an interaction. Modeling trust is a popular
keep in mind that the robot can maintain Bayesian reason- topic of research, and there are several other models of trust
ing over a human modeled with Markovian latent dynamics, dynamics (see [89] for a review of potential models) that
as is the case in Figure 4, and that we are only concerned have yet to be applied to solve this trust-influence problem.
with the latter to classify Markovian latent dynamics func- Typically, this problem is shown to successfully demonstrate
tions. This is particularly relevant in POMDP settings as influence by verification of appropriate trust levels through
the structure prompts this paradigm. self-report surveys post-test since this is the only way to
recover a ground-truth measure of this latent state.
Of particular note is that Markovian latent dynamics mod-
els are most commonly applied to influence human trust. Similarly to trust, Markovian influence has been applied
11

to other human factors objectives: enhancing human at- state θˆ , thus giving us a function expressing dynamics.
t−1
tention [56] and knowledge [21] in POMDP settings where This can be seen in Figure 5 where each prediction of θˆ
t
latent transitions matrices are directly learned from data. is not dependent on the previous prediction while dynam-
The former applied the Baum-Welch algorithm and success- ics is still expressed through the time differential between
fully observed influence through improved response times the input o and output θˆ of E. In the reviewed works,
t−1 t
while the latter directly observed the likelihood of transi- encoded latent dynamics representations consist of autoen-
tion probabilities from prior data and showed the ability to coders, predictive networks, transformers, and fixed approx-
influence through post-test surveys. Besides this, Marko- imators. Similar to the aforementioned fixed function, the
vian influence can attempt to alter human goals such as latter representation refers to encoded approximators with
reach objective [58] by applying an Agent Markov Model fixed parameters that are not learned.
(AMM) [90] that specifies latent transitions within agent
Encoded latent dynamics methods are typically the most
decision dynamics. Interestingly, these Markovian influence
flexible as they can take any arbitrary input to ϕ. However,
methods learn unconstrained transition functions directly
a large portion of these approaches focus on using deep
from data, likely because pre-existing models for these la-
learning to recover a dynamics function from a dataset in a
tent state transitions do not yet exist since they are often
way that may be susceptible to overfitting. This can be miti-
task-specific. This is not the case with trust, where trust dy-
gated with a sufficiently large training dataset which results
namics are often determinate of features common through-
in the main limitation of encoded methods: a sufficiently
out all tasks (e.g., performance), thereby allowing ubiqui-
large dataset may be expensive or infeasable to collect. The
tous models to be available.
computational resources needed to train these models is
Markovian influence tends to lend itself to modeling and often larger than those of other methods. Alternatively, in
influencing humans within a single interaction [20,21,49,50, the case of a fixed approximator, these dynamic functions
54,55,56,57,58]. This is due to the form of the latent dynam- have to be manually authored which can lead to errors if
ics being explicitly defined for each state-observation pair the latent system is not correctly or sufficiently specified.
which is particularly compliant with updating within inter-
active episodes. However, Markovian influence can also take
place between interaction episodes if framed as a meta-MDP 7.1 Encoded Mutual Adaptation
problem [48,51,52,53] which plans to influence hierarchically
separate from low-level planning. Also, similarly to Bayesian Encoded latent dynamics methods are another approach
influence, all the reviewed Markovian influence approaches to modeling human adaptive behavior and latent dynamics
model an explicit latent state. inspired by traditional approaches in robots learning from
human data [91,92]. In contrast to Markovian models and
Bayesian models, the encoded latent dynamics model di-
7 Encoded Latent Dynamics rectly maps the stream of observations o to θˆ as shown
t t+1
in Figure 5.
Similar to Markovian latent dynamics models, encoded mod-
els have also been used in a game theoretic interactive set-
ting for modeling HRI [11,60,66]. Authors in [11] modeled
a pHRI task as a cooperative game between the human and
the robot and used bargaining theory to update the weight
of each player’s cost in the overall cost as the latent state
within interactions. The latent dynamic used in this work
Figure 5: Given a stream of observations o , an encoded has a predefined structure based on bargaining theory that
t
latent dynamics model for the human consists of encoder gets the previously observed data and outputs the weight
using a less compact representation of latent state o to of the human’s cost in the overall cost function of the coop-
t
predict the next latent state θˆ . Here, the “dynamics” erative game. Here, the authors also provide a convergence
t+1
is captured by a time differential between the input and guarantee of their approach. In [60], the HRI task has been
output of the encoder where, typically, the robot discretely considered as a cooperative Markov game. A neural net-
adopts the encoded latent state instead of forming a belief work called a co-policy has been trained using a dataset of
over Θ. human-human interactions to output the solution of this
Markov game at each timestep by getting the current states
In encoded latent dynamics, we do not directly find a map and the human strategy code as the latent state. Instead of
from the previous latent state to the next. Instead, we rely solving for the co-policy using RL, which requires a complex
on less-compact representations of human latent state o t−1 reward function for human-robot collaboration, imitation
that implicitly encode θˆ t−1 to predict θˆ t . Encoded latent learning directly learns from demonstrations. Thus, human-
dynamics therefore use an encoder ϕ := E as our latent human demonstration data is recorded, and co-policy learn-
dynamics function: ing is formulated using MA-GAIL, a multi-agent extension
θˆ t ←E(o t−1 ) (8) of the Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL).
Notice how the current latent state θˆ is determined by the The implicit latent state is modeled as the output of an au-
t
past observation o , which characterizes the past latent toencoder (as the representation of the latent dynamics)
t−1
12

7.2 Encoded Influence
that gets an observation history and encodes it to θˆ. Com- a compact representation of the physical human state, and
t
bining these two trained networks, the robot can predict the latent dynamics consist of a feedback loop, which is a
the strategy code and use it to find the appropriate action Markovian function, and a feed-forward loop, which is a
using the co-policy network to satisfy the game solution. neural network that acts within interactions based on the
In another game-theoretic approach [66], a more state-of- observation history, combining a Markovian approach with
the-art representation of encoded latent dynamics is used. an encoded approach. However, as noted by the authors,
The authors have used pre-trained Motion Transformers maintaining the Markovian property in such a framework
(MTR) [93], a transformer-based encoder-decoder architec- is challenging. In response to this issue, an RNN was em-
ture that takes as input the previously observed trajectory ployed to estimate the current latent state from a sequence
of the human agent and outputs the parameters of a Gaus- of past observations. Their network was first trained on a
sian Mixture Model (GMM). This GMM is then used to pHRI task dataset and then their model was validated by
predict the possible future trajectories of the human driver. its success in predicting the next physical state.
These predictions are subsequently integrated into a game-
Using trust as the latent state has also been observed among
theoretic Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) reachability anal-
encoded latent state dynamics approaches. The OPTIMO
ysis to enable safe trajectory planning for the autonomous
model presented in [63,94] benefits from combining Bayesian
agent.
and encoded approaches by considering a Dynamic Bayesian
Among all the latent dynamics representations, autoen- Network (DBN) as the latent dynamics representation and
coders are a popular choice in encoding approaches. They predicting human trust within interactions. With a trust
learn features and provide a compact representation of hu- parameter prediction, the robot can switch to more conser-
man behavior during tasks as an implicit representation of vative (less aggressive) control mode to reduce trust losses.
the latent state [10,59,61,62]. The study in [59] focuses on Model validation was done by showing how the robot oper-
learning effective latent representations for the demonstra- ating under OPTIMO can accurately adapt to the human
tion of human policies. Using simulation data, the authors collaborator’s actions and attitudes compared to other ap-
trained an autoencoder to predict the upcoming human proaches.
policy, then adjusted the representation with test-time in-
The use of state-of-the-art architectures, such as transform-
teraction data to not rely solely on simulated populations.
ers, for modeling latent dynamics in mutual adaptation is
Their model updates the implicit latent state between in-
demonstrated in [17] and [64]. In [17], the authors develop a
teractions by maximizing the likelihood of observed human
human intent prediction model that estimates the probabili-
behavior, enabling more accurate human policy prediction
ties of transitioning between latent states (i.e., high-level in-
for robust robot adaptation in physical assistance scenarios.
tents) across interactions. Although the time-varying intent
Alternatively, in [10], the latent state is represented as the
model is initially introduced as a Markovian function, it is
human’s goal position that does not come directly from an
estimated through encoded latent dynamics. Their model is
autoencoder. Instead, it is derived from a GMM. In this
implemented using a transformer architecture that takes the
model, within each interaction, the distribution parameters
history of observed data as input and is trained in simula-
of the GMM are updated and come from an autoencoder as
tion across various navigation tasks to capture all possible
the latent dynamics representation. A Modified Extended
high-level human intents during the task. To mitigate the
Kalman Filter (MEKF) algorithm fine-tunes the model
risk of incorrect intent prediction, the model actively queries
parameters and executes online adaptation for better indi-
the human when uncertainty is high.
vidual customization and scenario transfer where they show
scalability of their algorithm to different task complexities. Finally in [64], Generative Pre-trained Transformers (GPTs)
Similarly, in [61], autoencoders are used to generate a latent and Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs) have recently been uti-
embedding of the human’s future joint positions in a feed- lized in constructing a neural network representation of
ing assistance task. The predicted joint positions are then the latent dynamics. The authors developed the method
used to derive a human-aware policy for the robot, which (BeTrans) for both long and short-term human goal antici-
generates an action that more closely aligns with the user’s pation as the latent state. Their transformer was trained in
motion tendencies. Finally, in [62], autoencoders are em- two phases: pre-training and fine-tuning. In pre-training, us-
ployed in a pursuer-evader game. Vision-based RGB camera ing simulated human behaviors (to avoid the need for large
data are used to generate a latent embedding of the human datasets) they formed their model prediction error to form
evader’s navigation intent via an autoencoder. This latent their training loss for learning the weight of the network.
representation is then used to model the evader’s policy, en- In fine-tuning, the model used predicted latent variables
abling a robotic pursuer to effectively intercept the evading along with state and action inputs to forecast the next state
human. The autoencoder is trained offline with fully ob- and reward. They validated their method by comparing its
servable possible evader policies, then the trained network performance with ORACLE.
has been used in real time where the human policy is not
observable.
7.2 Encoded Influence
The use of predictive networks to represent latent dynamics
in mutual adaptation includes the use of RNNs to repre-
In the same way that Bayesian and Markovian mutual adap-
sent how time series of past observations might affect an
tation can be extended to influence, so can encoded latent
explicit latent state. In [65], the latent state is defined as
13

dynamics by additionally integrating it into planning during showed promise for influencing real humans towards more
the control step. optimal behavior, where LILI and SILI failed to effectively
do so outside simulated settings [67].
Much of the work on encoded latent dynamics to enable
influence stems from the creative use of autoencoders. Tra- Most recently, [69] has attempted to relax limitations of
ditionally, autoencoders create implicit latent embeddings LILI, SILI, and RILI on limited complexity in policies, re-
by optimizing reconstruction loss between a feature set iden- quirement for online data, and the ability to only influence
tically used as input to the encoder and output to the de- between interactions by showing the ability to influence
coder. However, to capture dynamics, an autoencoder can humans towards more optimal policies. This was done by
optimize reconstruction loss between a previous observation training an autoencoder to model latent dynamics using
o and the same feature set in the next timestep o . The a human-human data prior. With this available dynamics
t−1 t
reviewed works primarily formulate the interaction problem function, an agent was then able to learn to influence offline.
as a series of HiP-MDPs [95] where the latent state is as- While [68] does not directly frame the learning problem in
sumed to be fixed within a single interaction and transition an HRI setting, the FURTHER algorithm applies an au-
between interactions. toencoder framework to estimate the latent dynamics of the
partner agent in a very similar way to LILI, SILI, and RILI.
This line of work began with the Learning and Influencing
Latent Intent (LILI) algorithm [22] that trains an autoen- In [12], the authors deviate from the autoencoder framework
coder to encode the previous trajectory o and recon- and use a transformer encoder to represent a wide range of
t−1
struct the next trajectory o using a maximum likelihood possible learning dynamics functions. Here, they simultane-
t
objective over observed transitions. Here, the output of the ously infer the initial latent state θˆ and the latent dynam-
0
encoder is the implicit representation of the human latent ics approximation parameters using maximum likelihood
strategy, which can be expressed as θˆ ←E(o ). By maxi- estimation and gradient-based optimization over previous
t t−1
mizing expected reward across future interactions, under the observations within an interaction. More directly, in [70],
dynamics represented by the implicit encoding θˆ, a robot the authors used an RNN to encode a sequence of observa-
t
can learn to influence the human between interactions. The tions into latent states that approximated a human’s biased
authors were able to show that the robot could successfully belief update between interactions. Both former articles
influence another robot’s (human-proxy) shooting strategy show the influence towards more optimal human behavior
in an air hockey experiment, but failed to do so with real through a more successful policy. Lastly, the authors of [71]
humans as the influencing robot’s policy was found to be extend this to a multi-human setting where they train a
too “brittle” when playing against a human with imperfect robotic policy to exert social influence on a group by using
action emissions. a dynamic leader-follower graph, approximated by a long
short-term memory (LSTM) network, where they are able
This framework was extended to Stable Influencing of La-
to show that they can influence the team’s navigation goals
tent Intent (SILI) by adding an auxiliary reward that penal-
within an interaction.
izes large distances between θ and θ [29]. This enforces
t−1 t
pairwise stability on the human’s latent state to promote
more consistent interactive policies. By doing so, the robotic
8 Applications
agent learns to take actions that influence the human be-
tween interactions to maintain their current latent state
such that θ t+1 ≈ θ t . Generally, stability was achieved in In this section, we study the distribution of latent dynamics
several settings with a simulated human collaborator. models used for mutual adaptation and influence tasks in
various applications in HRI. To achieve better organization,
Alternatively, Robustly Influencing Latent Intent (RILI) [67]
the classification system proposed in [96] was adapted to
was developed to consider latent dynamics functions that
sort HRI applications into different groups based on the
differ between individual humans. Here, an additional latent
robot task and the human role.
hyperparameter that describes different latent dynamics
functions is learned with another encoder trained on the his- According to the definitions proposed in [96], robot tasks
tory of past latent states {θ t−1 ,θ t−2 ,...}. This hyperparame- in various applications can be categorized into five groups:
ter is then used as input alongside the previous trajectories manipulation (e.g., pick-and-place [43]), transport (e.g., au-
to predict the next latent state in a similar way to LILI to tonomous vehicles [10]), cognitive stimulation (e.g., tutoring
achieve a latent dynamics encoding. This parameter is then robots [21]), information exchange (e.g., recommendation
inferred between interactions, and planning is done condi- systems [50]), and physical stimulation1 (e.g., motor impair-
tionally (i.e., robustly) by considering possible variations ment assistance [59]). Examples of these tasks can be found
over latent dynamics functions and states. A slightly differ- in Figure 6. Moreover, the role of the human can be classi-
ent formulation of RILI was proposed in [13] where authors fied in six ways: collaborator (e.g., table carrying [6]), oper-
forgo this hyperparameter and instead rely on past interac- ator (e.g., teleoperation [26]), supervisor (e.g., intermittent
tion data {o t−1 ,o t−2 ,...} to inform which dynamics function control [57]), cooperator (e.g., leader-follower games [71]),
is being used. Thus, they robustly train a single model with coactive2 (e.g., collision avoidance [47]) and competitor (air
several partners such that the encoder can predict multi-
ple types of latent dynamics functions. While most of these
1Referrerstobothphysicalstimulationandloadreductionin[96]
2Referredtoasbystanderin[96]
models were verified to influence simulated humans, RILI
14

Table 2: Taxonomy of Robot Task and Human Role
Bayesian Markovian Encoded
Mutual Mutual Mutual
Influence Influence Influence
Adaptation Adaptation Adaptation
ksaT
toboR
[38,40], [6,17,43] [20,55], [13,22,67],
Manipulation [35] [60,64,65]
[18,42] [19,26,30] [57,58] [12,68]
[10,63],
Transport - [37,39] [44,46,47] [51,52,54] [29,69,71]
[62,66]
[38,39],
Info Exchange - - [49,50,58] - [70]
[18,42]
[48,56],
Cognitive Stim. [36] [41] - - -
[21,53]
Physical Stim. - - [30,45] - [11,59,61] -
eloR
namuH
[6,26,43], [20,54,55], [59,64,65],
Collaborator [35,36] [18,38] [13,67,69]
[30,45] [56,58] [60,61]
Operator - [42] [19,44,46] [53,57] - [12]
[49,50,51,52],
Supervisor - [40] [17,44] [63] -
[53,56,57]
Cooperator - - [30] [21,48] [11] [70,71]
Coactive - [37,39,41] [47] - [10,66] [29]
Competitor - - - - [62] [22,68]
(a) Manipulation with human (b) Transport with coactive (c) Info exchange with human
collaborator [43] humans [10] supervisor [50]
(d) Cognitive stim. with human (e) Physical stim. with human
cooperator [21] collaborator [59]
Figure 6: Illustration of examples of latent dynamics being used for mutual adaptation and influence in the many domains
of HRI. Figures 6a-6e provide a classification of both the robot task and the human role for each cited work.
15

hockey [22]). Organizing applications in this manner allows on robots providing physical assistance to humans [59] or
for a clear understanding of how different latent dynam- joint control problems [11,30,45] where anticipation of la-
ics models may be either effective or ineffective in various tent state (i.e. mutual adaptation) is sufficient to achieve
scenarios. This is particularly valuable when determining assistive objectives whereas we typically do not want to be
whether mutual adaptation or influence is best suited for directly changing the underlying features of the human (i.e.
a particular HRI application. This categorization has been influence). While rehabilitation robotics could be a notable
applied to all reviewed literature in this paper and has been physical stimulation task where influence plays a role, this
summarized in Table 2. For a broader view how these ap- approach has not been explored in existing latent dynamics
plications correlate with all dimensions presented in this literature, to the best of our knowledge, likely due to a la-
survey, we refer the readers to Figure 7. tent dynamics model of neuromuscular recovery mechanisms
being exceedingly complex.
An immediate observation from Table 2 is that the majority
of the reviewed literature falls under the categories of ma- Regarding Bayesian latent dynamics, we observed that it
nipulation (23 papers) and transport (15 papers) in terms of is predominantly used for influencing humans rather than
robot tasks. We believe this reflects a natural characteristic for mutual adaptation. This is likely because Bayesian mod-
of HRI, as current state-of-the-art research in HRI is most els primarily deal with the human’s belief about external
commonly framed as a robotic arm or autonomous vehicle features like the world [70] or, more typically, their robot
interacting with a human. Similarly, a significant portion partner [18,38,40,41,42]. Thus, Bayesian latent dynam-
of the papers consider the human role as a collaborator (21 ics complies well with robot objectives that seek to align
papers). This aligns with the tendency of HRI to be framed human beliefs with reality, which is inherently an influence
as a collaborative problem, highlighting the strong interest problem.
in collaborative tasks within state-of-the-art HRI research.
We can also observe that mutual adaptation saw very few
9 Discussion
applications in information exchange and cognitive stimula-
tion robot tasks. This is because, according to our proposed
framework, these two tasks are inherently an influence prob- In this section, we first provide an outline of how researchers
lem. In information exchange and cognitive stimulation may make decisions when implementing latent dynamics.
tasks, as the names suggest, the robot’s primary objective is This discussion is provided in the context of the classified
to stimulate or alter the internal state of the human—either works in Table 1 along the listed dimensions of approach,
by providing information to the human (e.g., legible mo- latent dynamics class, latent dynamics representation, and
tion [18,38,39,42], verbal communication [58], text-based update frequency. Then, we discuss emergent themes that
communication [49,50], or synthesized observations [70]) arise from subsets of works to highlight existing trends
or by influencing cognitive features like knowledge [21], at- in the current field of latent dynamics. We support these
tention [41,56], or trust [48]. At the same time, we observe trends with analysis provided in Figure 7 that shows fre-
that most cognitive stimulation and information exchange quency of co-occurrence between the presented dimensions.
tasks utilize Markovian latent dynamics, closely followed by Finally, we provide a summary of research areas that could
Bayesian latent dynamics, with minimal use of encoded la- warrant further investigation.
tent dynamic models for these applications. We believe this
observation can be attributed to two primary reasons. First,
studies have shown that many human internal states are 9.1 Latent Dynamics Implementation
effectively Markovian in nature [97], while Bayesian models
are widely regarded as a simple and cognitively valid repre- Selecting an Approach: The work until this point has
sentation of human reasoning [98]. Second, most encoded been structured to independently review approaches to mu-
latent dynamics models create a unique challenge here as tual adaptation and influence within the context of each
obtaining numerous, high-quality samples to train a dynam- latent dynamics model. But how do we know which ap-
ics model can be difficult when measuring latent states that proach is better in practice? Theoretically, influence is a
can only be observed through costly and indirect means like better maximizer of cumulative robot reward since it can
surveys. However, this only applies to when the model is not only anticipate, but also leverage sequential reasoning
learned. As observed in Table 2, most applications where about latent state to its advantage. Putting aside the ob-
the human agent is considered a supervisor employ Marko- vious computational challenge of solving the control step
vian latent dynamics, as in such tasks, the robot primarily under a dynamic latent state, this does not guarantee its
interacts with human internal states, often with the goal of superiority in all practical scenarios. To exemplify this, con-
calibrating trust. Thus, we also observe little works in en- sider an assistive robot that applies low-limb torques to
coded latent dynamics with a human supervisor due to the minimize human walking effort where the human’s latent
aforementioned issue of costly training samples. state is their intended gait.
In contrast to the limited use of mutual adaptation in cog- If we have an inaccurate model of how robot torques change
nitive stimulation and information exchange, physical stim- the human’s intended gait (i.e., latent state dynamics), then
ulation applications are exclusively proposed as a mutual the influential actions will not realize the expected higher
adaptation problem. This is because these studies focus payoff. In other words, compounding error from latent state
16

9.2 Emergent Properties
Approach D. E. F. G. H. I. J. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S.
Adaptation 1 22 0 Approach 11 9 2 5 2 1 6 2 4 0 0 18 4 10 1 5
Influence 2 0 29 Class 7 6 2 0 2 1 4 3 4 17 12 13 5 0
Bayesian 3 2 7 9 0 0 Class 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 3 5 2 0
Markov 4 9 13 0 22 0 11 4 1 1 3 0 0 0 12 8 9 0 3
Encoded 5 11 9 0 0 20 Dynamics Representation 17 5 9 4 2
Belief Update 6 2 7 9 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Dynamics
Representation
Finally, influence may not always be ethical to implement
[99], especially when this would cause a human to act against
their own interests (e.g., develop a compensatory gait that
hinders non-assisted walking). Thus, we should only look
to influence when we have an accurate model of latent state
dynamics, a well specified objective, and it is ethical to do 3 5 2 0
Fixed Function 7 5 2 0 7 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 5 0 2 so. Otherwise, mutual adaptation may be a superior ap-
Transition Matrix 8 4 4 0 8 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 proach.
Beta-Distribution 9 0 3 0 3 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Linear Gaussian Sys.10 0 4 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 3 2 0 3 Selecting a Latent Dynamics Class: Once an approach
Fixed Approximator11 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 2 0 0
is selected, a latent dynamics class can be chosen depend-
Autoencoder12 5 6 0 0 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 11 0 0 0 5 2 0
Predictive Network13 2 2 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 1 0 1 0 ing on access to human data and prior knowledge about the
Transformer14 2 1 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 Update 2 1 0 structure of the latent dynamics function as presented in
Within15 18 17 6 17 12 6 5 8 2 3 1 5 3 2 35 0 1 1 1 Table 1. The fact that these latent dynamics representations
Between16 4 12 3 5 8 3 3 0 1 1 0 6 1 1 0 16 1 1 1 and classes can be used interchangeably within each ap-
Manipulation17 10 13 5 9 9 5 2 5 0 2 0 5 2 2 16 7 1 1 1
proach is a direct result of the unifying framework proposed
Transport18 7 8 2 6 7 2 4 1 0 1 1 4 1 1 10 5 1 1 1
Information Exchange19 0 8 4 3 1 4 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 5 3 1 1 1 in this paper and provides a structured method for mak-
Cognitive Stimulation20 1 5 2 4 0 2 0 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 4 2 1 1 1 ing these decisions. For instance, Bayesian latent dynamics
Physical Stimulation21 5 0 0 2 3 0 3 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 4 1 1 1 1 may be useful when there is no human data prior (i.e., the
Collaborator22 12 10 4 10 8 4 3 4 0 3 0 6 2 0 16 6 1 1 1
ability to start with a uniform prior) and little additional
Operator23 5 8 1 8 4 1 4 3 1 1 0 0 2 1 10 3 1 1 1
Supervisor24 3 8 1 8 2 1 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 1 7 4 1 1 1 knowledge of how the human performs their latent update.
Cooperator25 2 4 0 3 3 0 2 1 1 0 0 0 2 0 4 2 1 1 1 However, if knowledge of the structure of the latent update
Coactive26 3 4 3 1 3 3 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 1 4 3 1 1 1 is available with some human data to fit a model, a Marko-
Competitor27 1 2 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 2 1 1 1 1
vian latent dynamics representation may be best. Finally,
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P 1 1 1
Adaptation Influence Bayesian M arkov Encoded Belief U pd F a ix te ed Fu T nc ra ti n o s n ition B M et a a t - r D ix ist L ri i b n u e t a io r n G a F u ix s e s d ia A n p S p A y r u o s t . x o i e m n a c t o o P d r r e e r dictive T r N a e n t s w fo o r r m W k e it r hin Betw een e t n la h n a r e c m g o e u i d c p h e s d u d s a m t l t a r a e u t n e c r n u t d u t l a e r d t e a ( y ) i s n . e g e a t . i m v t n e o i o n cs t p t r a h a r r i i a o n e t r u t t k h s h n e e e f o r u m e w l o l i f e s d o d r e a g l c a . e c m e o s b f s i t g t h u o e o a u la s s t l u y e ffi n l t e c a d ie r y n n - i t n ly g
Selecting a Latent Dynamics Representation Simi-
Figure 7: Bibliographic co-occurrence matrix showing the
larly to selecting the class, the choice of latent dynamics
frequency of co-occurrence between all presented dimensions
representation is a matter of personalization and prior
in this paper (defined in Sec. 4 and Sec. 8). Darker colors
knowledge. Fixed functions and approximators both as-
indicate higher frequencies relative to other co-occurrences
sert a constant representation of the dynamics but alleviate
within each bounded cross-section of dimensions (e.g.,
the need for data. Conversely, constraining dynamics to a
within the 2×3 Update-Class rectangle). Cross-sections
certain form as in other Markovian representations allows
may not sum to the total paper count in cases where works
more efficient use of data when learning parameters. Finally,
satisfied multiple criteria. Co-occurrence between Robot
if no prior knowledge of how the latent state progresses is
Task and Human Role is excluded for brevity.
available, one can rely on purely data-driven methods such
as encoded representations or learn a Markovian transition
matrix directly as in [57].
dynamics in the control step may produce actions that are
largely erroneous. In contrast, this error only occurs once Selecting an Update Frequency: Rationale for selecting
in mutual adaptation during the prediction step. Thus, if update frequency and exact latent dynamics representation
inaccuracies are small enough to improve prediction com- are subject to particular setting of the task. For example,
pared to one-way adaptation but generate erroneous influ- update frequency should be selected based on how often the
ence, then mutual adaptation is likely the best approach. human latent state is likely to change. For example, within
This consideration is especially critical in light of the real- interaction may be better suited for fickle latent states like
world difficulties in modeling an unobservable transition adaptability [6] while between interaction may be better
with noisy observations (e.g., stochastic humans or sensor suited for things like sorting preferences [17] that may have
noise). some resilience once the interaction has started.
Additionally, influence may suffer under an ill-specified ob-
jective where the robot function fails to capture all task
9.2 Emergent Properties
aspects. Even with a perfect latent dynamics model, if the
measured human walking effort (objective) is incorrectly de-
The remainder of this section will now review particular
fined or subject to sensing errors, then the control step may
observations that arose as part of this survey to better allow
produce actions that risk steering the human toward gaits
researchers to make decisions on how to apply these models.
(latent state) with unintended consequences. This effect is
less prevalent with mutual adaptation, as the human retains Latent Dynamics Classes: Among all reviewed papers,
higher task arbitration and is not subject to the erroneous Markovian models are the most prevalent class for both
influence. mutual adaptation and influence (Figure 7, Col A-B Row
17

9.2 Emergent Properties
3-5). We believe this popularity stems from the usefulness of Evaluation Methods: The success of a given mutually
Markovian dynamics in planning optimal actions [100], their adaptive or influential model was found to be evaluated in
computational efficiency, and capacity to personalize human four ways: task performance, model validity, tractability,
behavior through parameterization of constraining functions. and generalizability.
The latter point comes from the fact that human latent
Almost ubiquitously, the reviewed works rely on objective
states can often be accurately described as Markovian [97].
measures of task performance (i.e., the ability to interact
For example, the human trust parameter exhibits inherent
effectively and achieve task goals) such as reward. Typically,
Markovian properties, as it is significantly influenced by
performance was then compared to baseline algorithms,
previous moments of trust [86]. In addition, POMDPs are
such as Oracle [22,64] or standard Q-learning [36], to show
a common interactive setting in the reviewed works and
whether their model led to improved outcomes within a
are fully compliant with Markovian latent dynamics due
specific task. Task performance metrics commonly include
to the partially observable transition function’s ability to
success rate, response time, path tracking error, and percep-
be decomposed into world (observable) and latent state
tual measures like trust and collaboration. Since measuring
(unobservable) transition functions.
task performance inherently depends on the nature of the
Conversely, Bayesian latent dynamics are notably less com- task, there are no standard metrics that would be applica-
mon (Figure 7, Col C). This is particularly surprising given ble to all of the reviewed works. However, using statistical
the widespread use of Bayesian inference in one-way adap- significance tests to show a significant improvement in task
tation [101,102,103], its computational efficiency in lower- performance over an existing baseline provides good evi-
dimensional spaces, and its simplicity as a representative dence that mutual adaptation and influence methods can
model for human cognition [98]. We believe that this dispar- translate to real-world benefits.
ity indicates that the application of Bayesian latent dynam-
As latent dynamics models refer to a hidden variable, it may
ics has not been fully explored in mutual adaptation and
also be helpful to evaluate model validity (i.e., the coherence
influence. This may be due to the fact that, compared to
between the predicted and true latent state). However, it is
Markovian and encoded latent dynamics models, Bayesian
not always easy or necessary to directly verify that the pre-
models are less personalizable and provide fewer options
dicted latent state accurately recovers the ground truth. In
to tune the model for different tasks and scenarios, which
mutual adaptation, this is typically not done as the focus is
makes Bayesian models less enticing for researchers who
on model performance, not latent state elicitation. Although
are exploring the potential of latent dynamics modeling in
some works do validate latent state in this way [17], most
mutual adaptation and influence.
leverage that fact that adaptability is intrinsically linked
Update Frequency: The other interesting observation to performance [104] and compare to some non-mutually
that can be made by looking at Figure 7 is that the number adaptive baseline as in [19]. Similarly, indirect influence (i.e.,
of articles that used within interaction updates is approxi- eliciting a latent state only as a means to an end) usually
mately double the number of articles that used between in- does not verify latent state accuracy, as it also focuses solely
teraction updates (Figure 7, Col O-P Row 15-16). One pos- on performance outcomes. However, direct influence (i.e.,
sible reason is that, typically, it is easier to perform within the goal is to elicit a specific latent state) requires a mea-
interaction studies as they are more sample-efficient. Also, surement to validate the model since robot performance is
when modeling the latent update as occurring between in- defined by its ability to elicit that latent state. Here, latent
teractions, it may be a strong assumption to assert that the states can be measured by induction of empirical observa-
human’s latent state is stationary within an episode depend- tions like policy distributions [22] or through measures of
ing on the setting. However, between-interaction updates human trust [49,51], knowledge [21], or perceptions of robot
may afford an opportunity for longer-term influence [37], characteristics [41]. Alternatively, some works elect to val-
but this has yet to be thoroughly explored. idate with a simulated human such that the latent state is
directly observable [22,40,70].
Types of Influence: We also observe two types of influ-
ence that arise in the reviewed works. First, influence can Evaluating the tractability of these models has also received
be indirect where the robot attempts to manipulate the la- some attention. Compared to more standard approaches
tent state as a means to an end and only cares about the (e.g., one-way adaptation), introducing latent state dynam-
final outcome of the interaction. This can be seen when the ics increases computational complexity. While mutual adap-
latent state is not directly considered in the reward function tation and influence generally utilize the same evaluation
but is dynamically modeled during the control step (e.g., techniques, tractability may be of higher importance for in-
you should not care what your air hockey opponent’s latent fluence due to the repeated application of latent dynamics
strategy is so long as it allows you to score more goals [22]). during the control step. Thus, some works analyze theo-
Alternatively, influence can be more direct where the robot retical computational complexity with Big O [6,20,55] to
intentionally drives the human to a desired latent state (e.g., ensure tractability. However, most works simply provide
modulating trust [20]) and is achieved by adding the latent empirical evidence of finite time convergence. Evaluating
state as a reward parameter. Deciding which approach to the convergence speed to a stable policy [64] may also be
influence is best depends on the interactive goals; is the helpful in determining the relative tractability of models
goal to simply improve robot task performance or elicit a given that similar performance is achieved. Similarly, abla-
particular quality or belief for the human? tion studies [13,71] are used to evaluate the tradeoff between
18

9.3 Open Challenges and Future Work
computational cost and performance of different latent dy- mation [106] have been proposed and demonstrated to be
namics models. For example, [29] compared continuous and effective in practice [91]. Also, more efficient latent dynam-
discrete latent spaces and found that a continuous latent ics models can support long-term prediction accuracy and
space leads to a noisy reward, which may make learning the speedup in complex or high-dimensional latent spaces. One
optimal policy less tractable. Similarly, [64] discretized a promising approach is to apply Neural ODEs for more effi-
continuous latent space to formulate a tractable problem. cient multi-step predictions by extrapolating future latent
While discretization may afford more tractable approaches, states constrained by ODEs instead of repeatedly perform-
higher resolution latent spaces can provide more descriptive ing single-step transitions [107]. Additionally, influential
power which motivates evaluating latent dynamics models policy solutions can be complex when solving the control
at different task complexities [60]. step with a non-stationary human partner. Thus, applying
state-of-the-art methods for solving these non-stationary
Finally, evaluating the generalizability across individuals
problems can aid effectiveness of latent dynamics influence
and tasks has also received a lot of attention. Simply put,
and reduce convergence time. For example, sample efficiency
works that study generalization across individuals study
of these solutions can be improved with meta-learning [108]
how population-level [13,69], online personalization [17,63],
for few-shot adaptation of influential strategies or LLM-
or sim-to-real [59,67] models transfer to an unseen partner.
informed exploration [109,110] that provide reasonable policy
More uniquely, a theoretical bound on generalization to an
priors.
unseen distribution of human partners was given by [67].
Alternatively, some attention is also given to how models Improving Generalizability: The majority of existing
transfer to out-of-distribution tasks. This can be studied works formulate task-oriented latent state and dynam-
by evaluating scenarios not observed in the training dataset ics (e.g., navigation goal [42]) or a fixed modality for the
within a particular task [10,47] or how well a single model dynamics function which limits the range of supported
generalizes to a completely new task [26]. Similarly, tasks tasks. Thus, models that consider multimodal latent dy-
can be scaled to evaluate how a model performs with differ- namics [111] can better describe variance in dynamics across
ent team compositions (e.g., single robot and multi-robot individuals and tasks, while generative methods like diffu-
team [44]). sion models [112] may further aid generalization in com-
pletely new scenarios, unlike current task generalization,
which requires high similarity between training and testing
9.3 Open Challenges and Future Work tasks. At the same time, diffusion-based latent dynamics
models present a promising direction for modeling multi-
In this section, we identify some open challenges based on modal latent state distributions (e.g., multi-modal human
our review, and propose some promising and important belief distributions represented as latent states). They also
future directions for the community. offer new opportunities for influence, such as steering the
sampling dynamics of diffusion models to guide behavior in
Standardization and Comparison: The lack of for-
different directions, as demonstrated in [113]. Leveraging
mal standards generally leads to a fragmented evaluation
the reasoning capabilities of foundation models may also
methodology (i.e., tasks and measures) for the field of la-
be an interesting direction for generalization. For example,
tent dynamics. A standardized benchmark that fulfills
vision language models (VLMs) [114] may provide a means
the requirements of many applications is challenging to
for generalizing to unseen scenarios by affording zero-shot
develop [105] but could better afford meaningful conclusions
semantic reasoning about the observations that support la-
about the relative effectiveness of different models. This
tent dynamics. Future work could explore coupling VLMs
review also did not identify any articles that compared mu-
with latent dynamics models, where the VLM provides high-
tual adaptation and influence within the same experimental
level semantic embeddings or task descriptions that inform
conditions. In fact, alternatives within any single dimension
the structure or priors of the latent state space. Such inte-
were not compared as indicated by the upper diagonal in
gration could enable agents to reason about latent states
Figure 7. Similarly, with such an agnostic approach to la-
or affordances using natural language supervision, paving
tent dynamics provided by this review, many unexplored
the way toward more interpretable and generalizable latent
areas in both implementation and application are revealed
representations in human–robot interaction.
by Figure 7 (e.g., encoded dynamics representations for in-
formation exchange and cognitive stimulation in Col K-N Latent Dynamics Alignment: In general, as the name
Row 19-20). Such comparative evaluations would be helpful suggests, latent state is a hidden variable that cannot be
to uncover the benefits and challenges of extending mutual directly observed. In order to effectively track human latent
adaptation to influence in the real world. states over time, we need aligned representations for both
the latent state and the latent dynamics. Latent state rep-
Improving Tractability: As previously mentioned, incor-
resentation alignment [16] asks whether the chosen latent
porating latent dynamics introduces additional computa-
state reflects not just functionally descriptive features, but
tional challenges. Primarily, Many of the studies reviewed
also what the human internally values and models. Such
in this paper formulate the problem as a POMDP, which
alignment enables models to represent causal features of
is known to be intractable in general with respect to com-
behavior. Latent dynamics alignment refers to capturing
puting the optimal policy. To address this challenge, var-
the causal relationships between the latent states, not nec-
ious approximation methods such as the QMDP approxi-
essarily if the latent states themselves are descriptive of a
19

causal feature (e.g., even if a latent state of fatigue is well- dynamics. Finally, this survey concluded by discussing ap-
represented in a task, a Markovian model might fail to re- plications, implementation, emergent properties, and open
flect its cumulative, non-Markovian nature, causing poor challenges. In doing so, this paper connects existing work
description of the relationship between one latent state and and provides a common framework for classifying, compar-
the next). A misaligned latent dynamics may be able to ac- ing, and integrating latent dynamics models in HRI, thereby
curately fit a dataset but fail to capture causal structures, supporting a more unified research effort in this field.
leading to learning spurious correlations and overlooking
fundamental processes. A deficit in alignment like this can Acknowledgments
then degrade value alignment and generalized task learn-
This material is based up on work supported by the Na-
ing [16] which highlights the importance of studying latent
tional Science Foundation under Grant Nos. 1828010, 192503,
dynamics alignment. For example, [12] examines human
and 1944833. M. O. Smith was additionally supported by
learning in a shared control setting. Here, latent state align-
the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award num-
ment asks whether the modeled latent state reflects what
ber FA9550-23-1-0283. while M. O. Smith and J. Bush were
the human is actually learning about (e.g., the robot’s iner-
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant
tia matrix versus its goal position). Likewise, one could do
No. 1828010. S. Amatya was supported by the National Sci-
the same with the assumed learning rule (e.g., a Bayesian
ence Foundation under Grant No. 1925403. S.Y. Soltanian
update or gradient descent) and consider its alignment with
was supported by the National Science Foundation under
the human’s actual learning process—this would be referred
Grant No. 1944833.
to as latent dynamics alignment. Without considering both
latent state and dynamics alignment, an influential robot
can easily mislead the human learner and degrade team
References
performance. While prior work has focused on latent state
representation alignment [16,115,116], alignment of latent
dynamics, to the authors’ knowledge, has not been studied
[1] M. Deniˇsa, A. Gams, A. Ude, and T. Petriˇc, “Learn-
and remains an open challenge.
ing compliant movement primitives through demon-
Ethical Considerations: Applying influence in HRI raises stration and statistical generalization,” IEEE/ASME
several ethical considerations that need to be further stud- Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 2581–2594,
ied [99]. For example, interaction data and personalized 2015.
interaction profiles may contain personally identifiable in-
[2] C. Baker, R. Saxe, and J. Tenenbaum, “Bayesian the-
formation and may thus be subject to data privacy pro-
ory of mind: Modeling joint belief-desire attribution,”
tections [117]. Additionally, influence may be applied to
in Proc. Annu. Meeting Cognitive Science Society,
drive people to take actions that are not in their best in-
vol. 33, no. 33, 2011.
terest, such as utilizing social and emotional mechanisms
to make people reliant on a paid service. This is particu- [3] A. Tiwari, A. Chugh, and A. Sharma, “Uses of artifi-
larly important since humans have been shown to conform cial intelligence with human-computer interaction in
to robot suggestions without having a strong basis to trust psychology,” in Innovations in Artificial Intelligence
the robot [118]. Establishing ethical safeguards for trans- and Human-Computer Interaction in the Digital Era.
parency, consent, and accountability in robot influence is Elsevier, 2023, pp. 173–205.
an urgent and developing area of research. Methods, such
as explainable AI, provide intent transparency can help hu- [4] M. Oudah, V. Babushkin, T. Chenlinangjia, and J. W.
mans understand the motivation behind robot actions and Crandall, “Learning to interact with a human part-
maintain informed consent during long-term HRI. ner,” in Proc. 10th Annu. ACM/IEEE Int. Conf.
Human-Robot Interaction, 2015, pp. 311–318.
[5] T. Ogata, M. Matsunaga, S. Sugano, and J. Tani,
10 Conclusion
“Human-robot collaboration using behavioral primi-
tives,” in 2004 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent
Although robot learning in stationary environments has Robots and Systems (IROS), vol. 2. IEEE, 2004, pp.
progressed significantly, interactions with dynamic humans 1592–1597.
present significant challenges. This review highlights the
[6] S. Nikolaidis, A. Kuznetsov, D. Hsu, and S. Srini-
importance of including latent state dynamics in robots’
vasa, “Formalizing human-robot mutual adaptation: A
prediction algorithms for better human-robot interactions
bounded memory model,” in 2016 11th ACM/IEEE
in such a non-stationary environment. We proposed a uni-
Int. Conf. Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE,
fied framework that extends one-way adaptation, where a
2016, pp. 75–82.
robot estimates past human latent states, to mutual adap-
tation and influence where robots consider the impact of [7] M. Natarajan, E. Seraj, B. Altundas, R. Paleja, S. Ye,
their actions on human behavior. We then used this frame- L. Chen, R. Jensen, K. C. Chang, and M. Gombolay,
work to review compliant mutual adaptation and influence Intentions and intentionality: Foundations of social
literature and organize the presented approaches into dis- cognition. The National Academies Press, 2022.
tinct classes of Bayesian, Markovian, and encoded latent
20

REFERENCES
[8] B. Baker, I. Kanitscheider, T. Markov, Y. Wu, [21] A. Ramachandran, S. S. Sebo, and B. Scassellati,
G. Powell, B. McGrew, and I. Mordatch, “Emergent “Personalized robot tutoring using the assistive tu-
tool use from multi-agent autocurricula,” in Int. Conf. tor pomdp (at-pomdp),” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Learn. Representations, 2019. Intell., vol. 33, no. 01, 2019, pp. 8050–8057.
[9] W. Li, D. Sadigh, S. S. Sastry, and S. A. Seshia, “Syn- [22] A. Xie, D. Losey, R. Tolsma, C. Finn, and D. Sadigh,
thesis for human-in-the-loop control systems,” in Tools “Learning latent representations to influence multi-
and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of agent interaction,” in Conf. robot learning. PMLR,
Systems: 20th Int. Conf., TACAS 2014. Springer, 2021, pp. 575–588.
2014, pp. 470–484.
[23] G. Kang, H. S. Oh, J. K. Seo, U. Kim, and H. R.
[10] L. Wang, Y. Hu, L. Sun, W. Zhan, M. Tomizuka, and Choi, “Variable admittance control of robot manipula-
C. Liu, “Transferable and adaptable driving behavior tors based on human intention,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
prediction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05140, 2022. Mechatronics, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1023–1032, 2019.
[11] P. Franceschi, N. Pedrocchi, and M. Beschi, “Adaptive [24] Z. Hou, T. Ma, W. Wang, and H. Yu, “Contextual
impedance controller for human-robot arbitration policy search for task-level adaptation in physical hu-
based on cooperative differential game theory,” in man–robot interaction,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mecha-
2022 Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. IEEE, 2022, pp. 7881– tronics, pp. 1–13, 2025.
7887.
[25] A. Bobu, D. R. Scobee, J. F. Fisac, S. S. Sastry,
[12] R. Tian, M. Tomizuka, A. D. Dragan, and A. Bajcsy, and A. D. Dragan, “Less is more: Rethinking prob-
“Towards modeling and influencing the dynamics of abilistic models of human behavior,” in Proc. 2020
human learning,” in Proc. 2023 ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-Robot Interaction,
Human-Robot Interaction, 2023, pp. 350–358. 2020, pp. 429–437.
[13] S. Parekh, S. Habibian, and D. P. Losey, “Rili: Ro- [26] S. Nikolaidis, D. Hsu, and S. Srinivasa, “Human-robot
bustly influencing latent intent,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ mutual adaptation in collaborative tasks: Models and
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. IEEE, 2022, pp. 01–08. experiments,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 36, no. 5-7, pp.
618–634, 2017.
[14] R. Steyer, M. Schmitt, and M. Eid, “Latent state–
trait theory and research in personality and individual [27] V. Gabler, T. Stahl, G. Huber, O. Oguz, and D. Woll-
differences,” European J. Personality, vol. 13, no. 5, herr, “A game-theoretic approach for adaptive
pp. 389–408, 1999. action selection in close proximity human-robot-
collaboration,” in 2017 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
[15] Y. Liu, E. Jun, Q. Li, and J. Heer, “Latent space car-
(ICRA). IEEE, 2017, pp. 2897–2903.
tography: Visual analysis of vector space embeddings,”
in Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 38, no. 3. Wiley [28] S. Ikemoto, H. B. Amor, T. Minato, B. Jung, and
Online Library, 2019, pp. 67–78. H. Ishiguro, “Physical human-robot interaction: Mu-
tual learning and adaptation,” IEEE Robot. Autom.
[16] A. Bobu, A. Peng, P. Agrawal, J. A. Shah, and A. D.
Mag., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 24–35, 2012.
Dragan, “Aligning human and robot representations,”
in Proc. 2024 ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-Robot [29] W. Z. Wang, A. Shih, A. Xie, and D. Sadigh, “Influ-
Interaction, 2024, pp. 42–54. encing towards stable multi-agent interactions,” in
Conf. Robot Learn. PMLR, 2022, pp. 1132–1143.
[17] J. Lidard, H. Pham, A. Bachman, B. Boateng, and
A. Majumdar, “Risk-calibrated human-robot interac- [30] Y. Li, G. Carboni, F. Gonzalez, D. Campolo, and
tion via set-valued intent prediction,” in Proc. Robot.: E. Burdet, “Differential game theory for versatile
Science Syst., 2024. physical human–robot interaction,” Nature Machine
Intelligence, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 36–43, 2019.
[18] A. D. Dragan, K. C. Lee, and S. S. Srinivasa, “Leg-
ibility and predictability of robot motion,” in 2013 [31] C. Tang, B. Abbatematteo, J. Hu, R. Chandra,
8th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human- R. Mart´ın-Mart´ın, and P. Stone, “Deep reinforcement
Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE, 2013, pp. 301–308. learning for robotics: A survey of real-world successes,”
Annu. Rev. Control, Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 8, 2024.
[19] S. Nikolaidis, Y. X. Zhu, D. Hsu, and S. Srinivasa,
“Human-robot mutual adaptation in shared autonomy,” [32] F. Semeraro, A. Griffiths, and A. Cangelosi, “Human–
in Proc. 2017 ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-Robot robot collaboration and machine learning: A system-
Interaction, 2017, pp. 294–302. atic review of recent research,” Robot. Comp.-Integr.
Manuf., vol. 79, p. 102432, 2023.
[20] M. Chen, S. Nikolaidis, H. Soh, D. Hsu, and S. Srini-
vasa, “Trust-aware decision making for human-robot [33] G. Hoffman, T. Bhattacharjee, and S. Nikolaidis, “In-
collaboration: Model learning and planning,” ACM ferring human intent and predicting human action
Trans. Human-Robot Interaction, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1– in human–robot collaboration,” Annu. Rev. Control,
23, 2020. Robot., Auton. Syst., vol. 7, 2023.
21

REFERENCES
[34] S. Amatya, M. Ghimire, Y. Ren, Z. Xu, and [46] X. Ji, K. Yang, X. Na, C. Lv, and Y. Liu, “Shared
W. Zhang, “When shall i estimate your intent? costs steering torque control for lane change assistance: A
and benefits of intent inference in multi-agent interac- stochastic game-theoretic approach,” IEEE Trans.
tions,” in 2022 American Control Conf. (ACC). IEEE, Industrial Electronics, vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 3093–3105,
2022, pp. 586–592. 2018.
[35] T. Liu, E. Lyu, J. Wang, and M. Q.-H. Meng, “Uni- [47] C. Blaiotta, “Learning generative socially aware mod-
fied intention inference and learning for human–robot els of pedestrian motion,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.,
cooperative assembly,” IEEE Trans. Automation Sci- vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 3433–3440, 2019.
ence and Engineering, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2256–2266,
[48] C. Yu, B. Serhan, and A. Cangelosi, “Top-tom: Trust-
2021.
aware robot policy with theory of mind,” in 2024
[36] T. Nagai, K. Abe, T. Nakamura, N. Oka, and IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA). IEEE,
T. Omori, “Probabilistic modeling of mental mod- 2024, pp. 7888–7894.
els of others,” in 2015 24th IEEE Int. Symp. Robot
[49] S. Bhat, J. B. Lyons, C. Shi, and X. J. Yang, “Clus-
and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN).
tering trust dynamics in a human-robot sequential
IEEE, 2015, pp. 89–94.
decision-making task,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.,
[37] S. Sagheb, Y.-J. Mun, N. Ahmadian, B. A. Christie, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 8815–8822, 2022.
A. Bajcsy, K. Driggs-Campbell, and D. P. Losey, “To-
[50] ——, “Evaluating the impact of personalized value
wards robots that influence humans over long-term
alignment in human-robot interaction: Insights into
interaction,” in 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
trust and team performance outcomes,” in Proc. 2024
(ICRA). IEEE, 2023, pp. 7490–7496.
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-Robot Interaction,
[38] S. Habibian and D. P. Losey, “Encouraging human 2024, p. 32–41.
interaction with robot teams: Legible and fair subtask
[51] Z. Zahedi, M. Verma, S. Sreedharan, and S. Kamb-
allocations,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 7, no. 3,
hampati, “Trust-aware planning: Modeling trust evo-
pp. 6685–6692, 2022.
lution in longitudinal human-robot interaction,” in
[39] S. H. Huang, D. Held, P. Abbeel, and A. D. Dragan, ICAPS 2021 Workshop on Explainable AI Planning,
“Enabling robots to communicate their objectives,” 2021.
Auton. Robots, vol. 43, pp. 309–326, 2019.
[52] ——, “Trust-aware planning: modeling trust evolu-
[40] J. Lee, J. Fong, B. C. Kok, and H. Soh, “Getting to tion in iterated human-robot interaction,” in Proc.
know one another: Calibrating intent, capabilities 2023 ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-Robot Interaction,
and trust for human-robot collaboration,” in 2020 2023, pp. 281–289.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems
[53] S. Sheng, E. Pakdamanian, K. Han, Z. Wang,
(IROS). IEEE, 2020, pp. 6296–6303.
J. Lenneman, D. Parker, and L. Feng, “Planning for
[41] J. J. Lee, F. Sha, and C. Breazeal, “A bayesian the- automated vehicles with human trust,” ACM Trans.
ory of mind approach to nonverbal communication,” Cyber-Physical Systems, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1–21, 2022.
in 2019 14th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-Robot
[54] Y. Li, J. Xu, D. Guo, and H. Liu, “Trust-aware
Interaction (HRI). IEEE, 2019, pp. 487–496.
human–robot fusion decision-making for emergency
[42] A. D. Dragan and S. S. Srinivasa, “A policy-blending indoor patrolling,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng.,
formalism for shared control,” Int. J. Robot. Res., 2024.
vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 790–805, 2013.
[55] M. Chen, S. Nikolaidis, H. Soh, D. Hsu, and S. Srini-
[43] S. Nikolaidis, S. Nath, A. D. Procaccia, and S. Srini- vasa, “Planning with trust for human-robot collabora-
vasa, “Game-theoretic modeling of human adapta- tion,” in Proc. 2018 ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-
tion in human-robot collaboration,” in Proc. 2017 Robot Interaction, 2018, pp. 307–315.
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-Robot Interaction,
[56] Y. V. Pant, B. T. Kumaravel, A. Shah, E. Kraemer,
2017, pp. 323–331.
M. Vazquez-Chanlatte, K. Kulkarni, B. Hartmann,
[44] Y. Wang, Z. Shi, C. Wang, and F. Zhang, “Human- and S. A. Seshia, “Modeling and influencing human
robot mutual trust in (semi) autonomous underwater attentiveness in autonomy-to-human perception hand-
robots,” Cooperative Robots and Sensor Networks offs,” in 2022 IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp.
2014, pp. 115–137, 2014. Syst. IEEE, 2022, pp. 2585–2592.
[45] Y. Li, K. P. Tee, R. Yan, W. L. Chan, and Y. Wu, [57] D. H. Mangalindan, E. Rovira, and V. Srivastava, “On
“A framework of human–robot coordination based trust-aware assistance-seeking in human-supervised
on game theory and policy iteration,” IEEE Trans. autonomy,” in 2023 American Control Conf. (ACC).
Robot., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1408–1418, 2016. IEEE, 2023, pp. 3901–3906.
22

REFERENCES
[58] V. V. Unhelkar, S. Li, and J. A. Shah, “Decision- [70] S. Reddy, S. Levine, and A. Dragan, “Assisted percep-
making for bidirectional communication in sequen- tion: optimizing observations to communicate state,”
tial human-robot collaborative tasks,” in Proc. 2020 in Conf. Robot Learn. PMLR, 2021, pp. 748–764.
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-Robot Interaction,
[71] M. Li, M. Kwon, and D. Sadigh, “Influencing leading
2020, pp. 329–341.
and following in human–robot teams,” Autonomous
[59] J. Z.-Y. He, Z. Erickson, D. S. Brown, A. Raghu- Robots, vol. 45, pp. 959–978, 2021.
nathan, and A. Dragan, “Learning representations
[72] D. Strouse, M. Kleiman-Weiner, J. Tenenbaum,
that enable generalization in assistive tasks,” in Conf.
M. Botvinick, and D. J. Schwab, “Learning to share
on Robot Learn. PMLR, 2023, pp. 2105–2114.
and hide intentions using information regularization,”
[60] C. Wang, C. P´erez-D’Arpino, D. Xu, L. Fei-Fei, Advances in Neural Inf. Proc. Syst., 2018.
K. Liu, and S. Savarese, “Co-gail: Learning diverse
[73] B. A. Christie and D. P. Losey, “Limit: Learning inter-
strategies for human-robot collaboration,” in Conf.
faces to maximize information transfer,” ACM Trans.
Robot Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 1279–1290.
Human-Robot Interaction, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1–26,
2020.
[61] J. Qin, S. Ban, W. Zhu, Y. Wang, and D. Samaras,
“Learning human-aware robot policies for adaptive
[74] R. Tian, L. Sun, A. Bajcsy, M. Tomizuka, and A. D.
assistance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08539, 2024.
Dragan, “Safety assurances for human-robot inter-
action via confidence-aware game-theoretic human
[62] A. Bajcsy, A. Loquercio, A. Kumar, and J. Malik,
models,” in 2022 Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA).
“Learning vision-based pursuit-evasion robot poli-
IEEE, 2022, pp. 11229–11235.
cies,” in 2024 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 9197–9204. [75] Z. Zhou, S. Wang, Z. Chen, M. Cai, H. Wang, Z. Li,
and Z. Kan, “Local observation based reactive tem-
[63] A. Xu and G. Dudek, “Maintaining efficient collabo-
poral logic planning of human-robot systems,” IEEE
ration with trust-seeking robots,” in 2016 IEEE/RSJ
Trans. Automation Science and Engineering, 2023.
Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 3312–3319. [76] A. Broad, I. Abraham, T. Murphey, and B. Argall,
“Data-driven koopman operators for model-based
[64] R. Mon-Williams, T. Stouraitis, and S. Vijayakumar,
shared control of human–machine systems,” Int. J.
“A behavioural transformer for effective collaboration
Robot. Res., vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 1178–1195, 2020.
between a robot and a non-stationary human,” in
2023 32nd IEEE Int. Conf. Robot and Human Inter- [77] L. Peters, D. Fridovich-Keil, C. J. Tomlin, and Z. N.
active Communication (RO-MAN). IEEE, 2023, pp. Sunberg, “Inference-based strategy alignment for
1150–1157. general-sum differential games,” in Proc. 19th Int.
Conf. Auton. Agents and Multiagent Systems. ACM,
[65] T. Kobayashi, S. Murata, and T. Inamura, “Latent
2020, p. 1037–1045.
representation in human–robot interaction with ex-
plicit consideration of periodic dynamics,” IEEE [78] M. Li, A. Canberk, D. P. Losey, and D. Sadigh,
Trans. Human-Mach. Syst., vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 928–940, “Learning human objectives from sequences of physical
2022. corrections,” in 2021 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
IEEE, 2021, pp. 2877–2883.
[66] H. Hu, Z. Zhang, K. Nakamura, A. Bajcsy, and J. F.
Fisac, “Deception game: Closing the safety-learning [79] J. Klayman, “Varieties of confirmation bias,” Psychol.
loop in interactive robot autonomy,” in Proc. 7th of Learn. and Motivation, vol. 32, pp. 385–418, 1995.
Conf. Robot Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 3830–3850.
[80] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Availability: A heuris-
tic for judging frequency and probability,” Cognitive
[67] S. Parekh and D. P. Losey, “Learning latent represen-
Psychol., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 207–232, 1973.
tations to co-adapt to humans,” Auton. Robots, pp.
1–26, 2023.
[81] S. Koenig and R. G. Simmons, “Unsupervised learning
of probabilistic models for robot navigation,” in Proc.
[68] D.-K. Kim, M. Riemer, M. Liu, J. Foerster, M. Ev-
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., vol. 3. IEEE, 1996,
erett, C. Sun, G. Tesauro, and J. P. How, “Influencing
pp. 2301–2308.
long-term behavior in multiagent reinforcement learn-
ing,” Advances in Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, [82] G. E. Monahan, “State of the art—a survey of par-
pp. 18808–18821, 2022. tially observable markov decision processes: the-
ory, models, and algorithms,” Management Science,
[69] J. Hong, S. Levine, and A. Dragan, “Learning to in-
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 1982.
fluence human behavior with offline reinforcement
learning,” Advances in Neural Inf. Proc. Syst., vol. 36, [83] S. C. Ong, S. W. Png, D. Hsu, and W. S. Lee, “Plan-
pp. 36094–36105, 2023. ning under uncertainty for robotic tasks with mixed
observability,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 29, no. 8, pp.
1053–1068, 2010.
23

REFERENCES
[84] O. Lemon and O. Pietquin, Data-driven methods for [98] T. L. Griffiths, N. Chater, C. Kemp, A. Perfors, and
adaptive spoken dialogue systems: Computational J. B. Tenenbaum, “Probabilistic models of cogni-
learning for conversational interfaces. Springer Science tion: Exploring representations and inductive biases,”
& Business Media, 2012. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 357–
364, 2010.
[85] T. Bandyopadhyay, K. S. Won, E. Frazzoli, D. Hsu,
W. S. Lee, and D. Rus, “Intention-aware motion plan- [99] A. Moon, S. Rismani, and H. M. Van der Loos,
ning,” in Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics X: Proc. “Ethics of corporeal, co-present robots as agents of
Tenth Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of influence: a review,” Current Robot. Reports, vol. 2,
Robotics. Springer, 2013, pp. 475–491. pp. 223–229, 2021.
[86] J. Lee and N. Moray, “Trust, control strategies and [100] B. Amos, I. Jimenez, J. Sacks, B. Boots, and J. Z.
allocation of function in human-machine systems,” Kolter, “Differentiable mpc for end-to-end planning
Ergonomics, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 1243–1270, 1992. and control,” Advances in Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
vol. 31, 2018.
[87] J. D. Lee and K. A. See, “Trust in automation: De-
signing for appropriate reliance,” Human factors, [101] S. Jain and B. Argall, “Probabilistic human intent
vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 50–80, 2004. recognition for shared autonomy in assistive robotics,”
ACM Trans. Human-Robot Interaction (THRI), vol. 9,
[88] S. Duane, A. Kennedy, B. J. Pendleton, and no. 1, pp. 1–23, 2019.
D. Roweth, “Hybrid monte carlo,” Physics Letters
[102] S. Iregui, J. De Schutter, and E. Aertbeli¨en, “Recon-
B, vol. 195, no. 2, pp. 216–222, 1987.
figurable constraint-based reactive framework for as-
[89] K. Govindan and P. Mohapatra, “Trust computations sistive robotics with adaptable levels of autonomy,”
and trust dynamics in mobile adhoc networks: A sur- IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 7397–
vey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 7405, 2021.
279–298, 2011.
[103] A. Jonnavittula and D. P. Losey, “I know what you
[90] V. V. Unhelkar and J. A. Shah, “Learning models of meant: Learning human objectives by (under) estimat-
sequential decision-making with partial specification ing their choice set,” in 2021 IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
of agent behavior,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Autom. (ICRA). IEEE, 2021, pp. 2747–2753.
vol. 33, no. 01, 2019, pp. 2522–2530.
[104] A. Tabrez, M. B. Luebbers, and B. Hayes, “A sur-
[91] S. Javdani, S. S. Srinivasa, and J. A. Bagnell, “Shared vey of mental modeling techniques in human–robot
autonomy via hindsight optimization,” Robot.: Sci. teaming,” Current Robot. Reports, vol. 1, pp. 259–267,
Syst., vol. 2015, 2015. 2020.
[92] A. Bajcsy, D. P. Losey, M. K. O’malley, and A. D. [105] M. O. Smith, S. Amatya, A. Amresh, J. Gorman,
Dragan, “Learning robot objectives from physical M. Johnson, N. Cooke, and W. Zhang, “Research
human interaction,” in Conf. Robot Learning. PMLR, needs in human-autonomy teaming: Thematic analysis
2017, pp. 217–226. of priority features for testbed development,” in 2024
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot and Human Interactive Com-
[93] S. Shi, L. Jiang, D. Dai, and B. Schiele, “Motion
munication (ROMAN). IEEE, 2024, pp. 1183–1190.
transformer with global intention localization and
local movement refinement,” Advances in Neural Inf. [106] M. L. Littman, A. R. Cassandra, and L. P. Kaelbling,
Process. Syst., vol. 35, pp. 6531–6543, 2022. “Learning policies for partially observable environ-
ments: Scaling up,” in Machine Learning Proceedings
[94] A. Xu and G. Dudek, “Optimo: Online probabilistic 1995. Elsevier, 1995, pp. 362–370.
trust inference model for asymmetric human-robot
collaborations,” in Proc. 10th Annu. ACM/IEEE Int. [107] H.-g. Chi, K. Lee, N. Agarwal, Y. Xu, K. Ramani,
Conf. Human-Robot Interaction, 2015, pp. 221–228. and C. Choi, “Adamsformer for spatial action local-
ization in the future,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. on
[95] F. Doshi-Velez and G. Konidaris, “Hidden parameter Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp.
markov decision processes: A semiparametric regres- 17885–17895.
sion approach for discovering latent task parametriza-
[108] Z. Bing, D. Lerch, K. Huang, and A. Knoll, “Meta-
tions,” in IJCAI: Proc. Conf., vol. 2016. NIH Public
reinforcement learning in non-stationary and dynamic
Access, 2016, p. 1432.
environments,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analy-
[96] L. Onnasch and E. Roesler, “A taxonomy to structure sis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 3476–
and analyze human–robot interaction,” Int. J. Social 3491, 2023.
Robot., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 833–849, 2021.
[109] J. de Curt`o, I. de Zarz`a, G. Roig, J. C. Cano, P. Man-
[97] A. Pentland and A. Liu, “Modeling and prediction of zoni, and C. T. Calafate, “Llm-informed multi-armed
human behavior,” Neural Comput., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. bandit strategies for non-stationary environments,”
229–242, 1999. Electronics, vol. 12, no. 13, p. 2814, 2023.
24

REFERENCES
[110] Z. Zhou, B. Hu, C. Zhao, P. Zhang, and B. Liu,
“Large language model as a policy teacher for train-
ing reinforcement learning agents,” in Proc. of the
Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence. ACM, 2024, pp. 5671 – 5679.
[111] V. Prasad, D. Koert, R. Stock-Homburg, J. Peters,
and G. Chalvatzaki, “Mild: multimodal interactive
latent dynamics for learning human-robot interaction,”
in 2022 IEEE-RAS 21st Int. Conf. on Humanoid
Robots. IEEE, 2022, pp. 472–479.
[112] E. Ng, Z. Liu, and M. Kennedy, “Diffusion co-policy
for synergistic human-robot collaborative tasks,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., 2023.
[113] Z. Huang, Z. Zhang, A. Vaidya, Y. Chen, C. Lv, and
J. F. Fisac, “Versatile behavior diffusion for gen-
eralized traffic agent simulation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.02524, 2024.
[114] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar,
X. Chen, K. Choromanski, T. Ding, D. Driess,
A. Dubey, C. Finn et al., “Rt-2: Vision-language-
action models transfer web knowledge to robotic con-
trol,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
[115] N. S. Dennler, S. Nikolaidis, and M. Mataric, “Using
exploratory search to learn representations for human
preferences,” in Companion 2024 ACM/IEEE Int.
Conf. Human-Robot Interaction, 2024, pp. 392–396.
[116] T. Tian, C. Xu, M. Tomizuka, J. Malik, and A. Ba-
jcsy, “What matters to you? towards visual represen-
tation alignment for robot learning,” in The Twelfth
Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024.
[117] M. Natarajan, E. Seraj, B. Altundas, R. Paleja, S. Ye,
L. Chen, R. Jensen, K. C. Chang, and M. Gombolay,
“Human-robot teaming: grand challenges,” Current
Robot. Reports, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 81–100, 2023.
[118] N. Salomons, M. Van Der Linden, S. Strohkorb Sebo,
and B. Scassellati, “Humans conform to robots: Dis-
ambiguating trust, truth, and conformity,” in Proc.
2018 ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-Robot Interaction,
2018, pp. 187–195.
25

REFERENCES
Arizona State University, USA. Mason is a Ph.D candidate in Systems Engineering specializing in integrating cognitive
models risk-sensitive human bias into (deep) reinforcement learning architectures for zero-shot personalized adaptation to
suboptimal humans in human-autonomy teams. He has formulated novel multi-agent risk-sensitive reinforcement learning
algorithms, performed human-autonomy experiments on teaming and trust, and conducted participatory user research for
the development human-autonomy teaming testbeds.
Sunny Amatya received her BSE degree in Mechatronics Engineering from Asian Institute of Technology in 2015 and MSc
degree in Advanced Robotics from the EMARO (European Masters in Advanced Robotics) Program in 2018. She received
her PhD in Systems Engineering from the Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering at Arizona State University. Her research
focuses on modeling human-like behavior in human-robot interaction using artificial intelligence and machine learning. Dr.
Amatya is currently working at FANUC America as a research and development engineer.
Arizona State University, USA. Yousef is a Ph.D. candidate in Mechanical Engineering, specializing in game-theoretic
algorithms for human–robot interaction and multi-agent decision-making under incomplete information. His research
focuses on mutual intent inference, adaptive planning, and safe control in dynamic games. He has developed frameworks
for learning-based multi-agent games, intent-communication strategies, and control methods that enable robots to interact
effectively with humans. His work spans applications in social navigation, autonomous systems, and wearable robotics.
26

REFERENCES
Arizona State University, USA. Jonathan is a PhD candidate in Systems Engineering. He developed the ASU Smart Bike
research platform for studying HRI in safety- and time-critical tasks. He is working on developing individualized and
adaptive human operator models for assistive systems in two-wheel vehicles.
Wenlong Zhang received his M.S. degree in mechanical engineering in 2012, the M.A. degree in statistics in 2013, and
Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering in 2015, all from the University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. He is currently
an Associate Professor with the School of Manufacturing Systems and Networks at Arizona State University, where he
directs the Robotics and Intelligent System Laboratory (RISE Lab). His research interests include dynamic systems model-
ing and control, wearable and soft robots, aerial robots, and human-machine collaboration. Dr. Zhang is a recipient of the
NSF CAREER Award.
27