Formalizing Human-Robot Mutual Adaptation:
A Bounded Memory Model
Stefanos Nikolaidis , Anton Kuznetsov , David Hsu and Siddhartha Srinivasa
⇤ ⇤ † ⇤
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
⇤
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
†
snikolai, antonk @andrew.cmu.edu, dyhsu@comp.nus.edu.sg,
{ }
siddh@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract—Mutual adaptation is critical for effective team
collaboration. This paper presents a formalism for human-
robot mutual adaptation in collaborative tasks. We propose the
bounded-memoryadaptationmodel(BAM),whichcaptureshuman
adaptive behaviors based on a bounded memory assumption.
We integrate BAM into a partially observable stochastic model,
whichenablesrobotadaptationtothehuman.Whenthehumanis
adaptive,therobotwillguidethehumantowardsanew,optimal
collaborative strategy unknown to the human in advance. When
the human is not willing to change their strategy, the robot
adapts to the human in order to retain human trust. Human
subject experiments indicate that the proposed formalism can
significantly improve the effectiveness of human-robot teams,
(a) (b)
whilehumansubjectratingsontherobotperformanceandtrust
are comparable to those achieved by cross training, a state-of- Fig.1:(a)Human-robottablecarryingtask.Rotatingthetablesothattherobot
the-art human-robot team training practice. isfacingthedoor(top,Goal1)isbetterthantheotherdirection(bottom,Goal
2), since the exit is included in the robot’s field of view and the robot can
I. INTRODUCTION avoidcollisions.(b)UIwithinstructions.
The development of new robotic systems that operate in
the same physical space as people highlights the emerging the room (Goal 2, Fig. 1a-bottom). We assume that Goal 1
need for robots that can integrate into human teams. Such is better, since the robot has a clear view of the door using
systems can achieve significant economic and ergonomic its on-board sensor and the team is more likely to succeed in
benefits in manufacturing, as well as improve the quality of executing the task. The human does not have this information
life of people at home. Previous work in human teaming has and may prefer to rotate the table towards Goal 2. Intuitively,
shown that mutual adaptation can significantly improve team if the human insists on the suboptimal goal, the robot should
performance [1]; we believe that the same holds for human- comply in order to finish the task. If the human is willing to
robot teams in collaborative tasks. adapt, the robot should guide them towards the optimal goal.
In previous work, human-robot cross-training has been In this paper, we describe a formalism for human and
shown to significantly improve subjective measures of team robot mutual adaptation, where the robot builds a model of
performance and metrics of team fluency [2]. The focus has humanadaptationtoguidethehumanteammatetowardsmore
beenthecomputationofarobotpolicyalignedwiththehuman efficientstrategies,whilemaintaininghumantrusttotherobot.
preference, without taking into account the quality of that We first present Bounded memory Adaptation Model (BAM),
preference. This can result in the team executing sub-optimal amodelbasedonaboundedmemoryassumptionwhichlimits
policies, if for instance the human has an inaccurate model the history length that the human team member considers in
of the robot capabilities. On the other hand, given a known their decision making. BAM additionally assumes that each
optimalwaytoexecutethetask,onecouldsimplyprogramthe human teammate has an a priori willingness to adapt to the
robot to always follow the optimal path, ignoring the actions robot, which we define as adaptability. The adaptability of
of the human teammate. This, however, can have a negative a participant is unknown beforehand and cannot be directly
effectonthehumantrustintherobot,affectingthewillingness observed. Therefore, we denote it as a partially observable
ofpeopletoworkwiththeirroboticteammatesandultimately variable in a mixed-observability Markov decision process
damaging the overall team performance [3]–[5]. (MOMDP)[6].TheMOMDPformulationenablestherobotto
For instance, Fig. 1 illustrates a collaborative task, where infertheadaptabilityofahumanteammatethroughinteraction
human and robot are carrying a table outside of the room. and observation, and reason in a probabilistic sense over the
Therearetwowaystofinishthetask,onewiththerobotfacing ways the human can change their strategy.
the door (Goal 1, Fig. 1a-top) and one with the robot facing We conducted a human subject experiment (n = 69) on a

1
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=0
1
User1
User2
User3
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=1
1
User1
User2
User3
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=2
1
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=3
1
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=4
1
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=5
Fig. 2: (Top row) MOMDP belief update on human adaptability ↵ 0,0.25,0.5,0.75,1.0 for three different users in the human subject experiment
2{ }
of Sec. VI. Larger values of ↵ indicate higher adaptability. (Second, third and bottom row) The rows correspond to Users 1, 2 and 3 and show the table
configurationateachtime-stepoftaskexecution.Columnsindicatedifferenttime-steps.Redcolorindicateshumanandrobotdisagreementintheiractions,
inwhichcasethetabledoesnotrotate.User1(tealdot)insistsontheirinitialstrategythroughoutthetaskandtherobot(blackdot)complies,whereasUsers
2and3(orangeandmagentadot)adapttotherobot.
simulated table carrying task (Fig. 1). Fig. 2 shows different cooperative planning system, in which human intention is
human and robot behaviors. If human and robot disagree on inferredforaturn-basedgame[17].Nikolaidisetal.proposed
their strategies within an interaction history of 3 time-steps a formalism to learn human types from joint-action demon-
and the human insists in their strategy in the next time-step, strations, infer online the type of a new user and compute
then the MOMDP belief is updated so that smaller values of a robot policy aligned to their preference [18]. Simultaneous
adaptability ↵ have higher probability (lower adaptability). If intent inference and robot adaptation has also been achieved
thehumanswitchestotherobotstrategy,largervaluesbecome through propagation of state and temporal constraints [19].
more likely. The belief remains the same once human and Another approach has been the human-robot cross-training
robotagreeontheirstrategies.Iftherobotinfersthehumanto algorithm, where the human demonstrates their preference
benon-adaptive,itcompliestothehumanstrategy.Otherwise, by switching roles with the robot, shaping the robot reward
it guides them towards the optimal goal. function [2]. Although it is possible that the human changes
In the experiment, participants were significantly more strategies during the training, the algorithm does not use
likelytoadapttotherobotstrategywhenworkingwitharobot a model of human adaptation that can enable the robot to
utilizing the proposed formalism (p = 0.036), compared to actively influence the actions of its human partner.
cross-training with the robot. Additionally, participants found
There have also been studies in human adaptation to the
the performance as a teammate of the robot executing the
robot.Previousworkhasfocusedonoperatortrainingformil-
learnedMOMDPpolicytobenotworsethantheperformance
itary, space and search-and-rescue applications, with the goal
of a robot that cross-trained with the participants. Finally,
of reducing the operator workload and operational risk [20].
the robot was found to be more trustworthy with the learned
Additionally, researchers have studied the effects of repeated
policy, compared with executing an optimal strategy while
interactions with a humanoid robot on the interaction skills
ignoring the adaptability of the human teammate (p=0.048).
of children with autism [21], on language skills of elementary
II. RELEVANTWORK schoolstudents[22],aswellasonusers’spatialbehavior[23].
Human adaptation has also been observed in an assistive
Therehasbeenextensiveworkonone-wayrobotadaptation
walkingtask,wheretherobotuseshumanfeedbacktoimprove
to the human. Approaches involve a human expert providing
its behavior, which in turn influences the physical support
demonstrationstoteachtherobotaskilloraspecifictask[7]–
provided by the human [24]. While the changes in the human
[12].Robotshavealsobeenabletoinferthehumanpreference
behavior are an essential part of the learning process, the
online through interaction. In particular, partially observable
system does not explicitly reason over the human adaptation
Markov decision process (POMDP) models have allowed
throughout the interaction. On the other hand, Dragan and
reasoning over the uncertainty on the human intention [13],
Srinivasaproposedaprobabilisticmodeloftheinferencemade
[14].TheMOMDPformulation[6]hasbeenshowntoachieve
by a human observer over the robot goals, and introduced
significant computational efficiency, and has been used in
a motion generating algorithm to maximize this inference
motion planning applications [15]. Recent work has also
towards a predefined goal [25].
inferred human intention through decomposition of a game
taskintosubtasksforgameAIapplications[16].Alternatively, We believe that the proposed formalism for human-robot
Macindoeetal.proposedthepartiallyobservableMonte-Carlo mutual adaptation closes the loop between the two streams

Inthiswork,wepresentBAM,amodelofhumanadaptation
World
a h whichspecifiesaparameterizationofthehumanpolicy⇡ h .We
define a set of modal policies or modes M, where m M
Belief 2
is a deterministic policy mapping states and histories to joint
Update
MOMDP human-robot actions: m:X H A A 0,1 .
on ↵ world ⇥ t ⇥ r ⇥ h !{ }
BAM policy a r At each time-step, the human has a mode m h 2 M and
perceives the robot as following a mode m M. Then, in
r
2
the next time-step the human may switch to m with some
r
probability ↵. If m maximizes the expected accumulated
Fig.3:IntegrationofBAMintoMOMDPformulation. h
reward, the robot optimal policy would be to take actions a
r
specified by m . If m is suboptimal and ↵ = 1, the robot
h h
optimal policy would be to follow m , expecting the human
of research. The robot reasons in a probabilistic sense over r
to adapt. In the general case of an unknown ↵, how can we
the different ways that the human may change their strategy,
compute ⇡ in Eq. (1)? We approach this problem using a
based on a model of human adaptation parameterized by the r⇤
MOMDP formulation, wherein ↵ is an unobserved variable.
participant’swillingnesstoadapt.Itupdatesthemodelthrough
This formulation allows us to estimate ↵ through interaction
interaction and guides participants towards more efficient
andintegratepredictionsofthehumanactionsintorobotaction
strategies, while maintaining human trust to the robot.
selection (Fig 3).
Mutualadaptationbetweentwoagentshasbeenextensively
exploredinthefieldofgametheory[26].Economictheoryre- IV. THEBOUNDEDMEMORYADAPTATIONMODEL
liessignificantlyononstrongassumptionsabouttherationality
Wemodelthehumanpolicy⇡ asaprobabilisticfinite-state
h
oftheagentsandtheknowledgeofthepayofffunctions.Such
automaton(PFA),withasetofstatesQ:X H .Ajoint
world t
assumptionsarenotnecessaryapplicableinsettingswherethe ⇥
human-robot action a , a triggers an emission of a human
h r
playersarenotinvolvedinafullcomputationofoptimalstrate-
and robot modal policy f :Q M M 0,1 , as well as
gies for themselves and the others [27]. We believe that this ⇥ ⇥ !{ }
a transition to a new state P :Q ⇧(Q).
is particularly true in a human-robot team setting, where the !
humanisuncertainonhowtherobotwillactandhaslittletime A. Bounded Memory Assumption
torespond.Therefore,weproposeamodelofhumanadaptive Herbert Simon proposed that people often do not have
behavior based on a bounded memory assumption [28]–[30] the time and cognitive capabilities to make perfectly rational
and integrate it into robot decision making. decisions, in what he described as “bounded rationality” [31].
This idea has been supported by studies in psychology and
III. PROBLEMSETTING economics [32]. In game theory, bounded rationality has been
modeled by assuming that players have a “bounded memory”
We formally describe the evolution of the human-robot
or “bounded recall” and base their decisions on recent ob-
collaborative task as a Multi-Agent Markov Decision Pro-
servations [28]–[30]. In this work, we introduce the bounded
cess (MMDP) [17] with a set of states Q : X H ,
world t
⇥ memory assumption in a human-robot collaboration setting.
robot actions a A (x ) and human actions a
r r world h
2 2 Under this assumption, humans will choose their action based
A (x ). X is a set of world states and H is
h world world t
on a history of k-steps in the past, so that Q:X H .
the set of all possible histories of interactions until time world k
⇥
t: h t = x world (0),a r (0),a h (0),...,x world (t 1),a r (t B. Feature Selection
{    
1),a (t 1) . The MMDP has a state transition function
h   } The size of the state-space in the PFA can be quite large
T :Q A A ⇧(Q) and an immediate reward function
R:R( ⇥ x wo r rl ⇥ d ,a r h ,a ! h ) 7! r 2 R +. ( a | X se w t o o r f ld fe | k a + tu 1 r | e A s, r | s k o | A th h a | t k   | ) ( . q T ) h = eref   o 1 re (q , ) w ,  e 2 a ( p q p ) r , o . x .. i , m   a N te (q it ) u . s W ing e
We assume that the human is enacting a stochastic policy { }
can choose as features the frequency counts  h,  r of the
⇡ unknowntotherobot.Thehumanpolicycanbearbitrarily m m
h modal policies followed in the interaction history, so that:
nuanced: ⇡ :X H ⇧(A ).
h world t h
The robot’s goal is ⇥ to c ! ompute its optimal policy ⇡ : k k
r  h = [mi =m]  r = [mi =m] m M (2)
X world H t A r that maximizes the expected discounted m h m r 8 2
accumul ⇥ ated re ! ward: X i=1 X i=1
mi and mi is the modal policy of the human and the robot
h r
i time-steps in the past. We note that k defines the history
1
⇡ r⇤ =arg max E⇡h  tr(t) (1) length, with k = 1 implying that the human will act based
⇡r "
X t=0
#
only on the previous interaction. Drawing upon insights from
where   [0,1) is a discount factor that downweighs previous work which assumes maximum likelihood observa-
future rewa 2 rds. Note here that because the human policy is tions for policy computation in belief-space [33], we used
unknowntotherobot,ithasnochoicebuttoreason(andtake as features the modal policies with the maximum frequency
expectations over) all possible human policies ⇡ h . count: m h =arg max h m , m r =arg max r m .
m m

1 ↵
 
1.0 0.75
↵
m m
h r
1.0
0.0 0.25
Fig.4:TheBAMhumanadaptationmodel.
The proposed model does not require a specific feature
representation. For instance, we could construct features by
#agreements
combining modal policies mi, mi using an arbitration func- User1 User2 User3
h r
tion[34].Additionally,ratherthanusingfrequencycounts,we
couldmaintainaprobabilitydistributionoverhumanandrobot
modes given the history, but we leave this for future work.
C. Human Adaptability
We define the adaptability as the probability of the human
switching from their mode to the robot mode. It would be
unrealistic to assume that all users are equally likely to adapt
to the robot. Instead, we account for individual differences by
parameterizing the transition function P by the adaptability
↵ of an individual. Then, at state q the human will transition
to a new state by choosing an action specified by m with
r
probability ↵, or an action specified by m with probability
h
1 ↵ (Fig. 4). We include noise in the model, by assuming
 
thatthehumancantakeanyotheractionuniformlywithsome
probability ✏.
V. ROBOTPLANNING
In this section we describe the integration of BAM in the
robot decision making process using a MOMDP formulation.
A MOMDP uses proper factorization of the observable and
unobservable state variables S : X Y with transition
⇥
functions and ,reducingthecomputationalload[6].The
x y T T
set of observable state variables is X : X Mk Mk,
world ⇥ ⇥
whereX isthefinitesetoftask-stepsthatsignifyprogress
world
towards task completion and M is the set of modal policies
followed by the human and the robot in a history length k.
The partially observable variable y is identical to the human
adaptability ↵. We assume finite sets of human and robot
actionsA andA ,andwedenoteas⇡ thestochastichuman
h r h
policy. The latter gives the probability of a human action a
h
at state s, based on the BAM human adaptation model.
Given a A and a A , the belief update becomes:
r r h h 2 2
b(y )=⌘O(s,a ,o) (s,a ,a ,x)
0 0 0 r x r h 0
T y Y (3)
X2
(s,a ,a ,s)⇡ (s,a )b(y) y r h 0 h h
T
We use a point-based approximation algorithm to solve the
MOMDP for a robot policy ⇡ that takes into account the
r
robot belief on the human adaptability, while maximizing the
agent’s expected total reward.
The policy execution is performed online in real time
and consists of two steps (Fig. 3). First, the robot uses the
current belief to select the action a specified by the policy.
r
stnemeergasid#
Fig. 5: (Left) Different paths on MOMDP policy tree for human-robot
(white/black dot) table-carrying task. The circle color represents the belief
on ↵, with darker shades indicating higher probability for smaller values
(less adaptability). The white circles denote a uniform distribution over
↵. User 1 is non-adaptive, whereas Users 2 and 3 are adaptive. (Right)
Instances of different user behaviors in the first round of the Mutual-
adaptation session. A horizontal/vertical line segment indicates human and
robotdisagreement/agreementontheiractions.Asolid/dashedlineindicates
ahumanrotationtowardsthesub-optimal/optimalgoal.Thenumbersdenote
themostlikelyestimatedvalueof↵.
Second, it uses the human action a to update the belief on
h
↵ (Eq. 3). Fig. 2 shows different user behaviors in the human
subject experiment described in Sec. VI. Fig. 5 shows the
corresponding paths on the MOMDP policy tree.
VI. HUMANSUBJECTEXPERIMENT
We conducted a human subject experiment on a simulated
table-carryingtask(Fig.1)toevaluatetheproposedformalism.
We were interested in showing that integrating BAM into the
robot decision making can lead to more efficient policies than
state-of-the-art human-robot team training practices, while
maintaining human satisfaction and trust.
On one extreme, we can “fix” the robot policy so that the
robotalwaysmovestowardstheoptimalgoal,ignoringhuman
adaptability.Thiswillforcealluserstoadapt,sincethisisthe
only way to complete the task. However, we hypothesize that
this will significantly impact human satisfaction and trust in
the robot. On the other extreme, we can efficiently learn the
human preference [2]. This can lead to the human-robot team
followingasub-optimalpolicy,ifthehumanhasaninaccurate
model of the robot capabilities. We show that the proposed
formalism achieves a trade-off between the two: When the
human is non-adaptive, the robot follows the human strategy.
Otherwise, the robot insists on the optimal way of completing
the task, leading to significantly better policies compared to
learningthehumanpreference,whilemaintaininghumantrust.
A. Independent Variables
We had three experimental conditions, which we refer to as
“Fixed,” “Mutual-adaptation” and “Cross-training.”
Fixed session The robot executes a fixed policy, always
actingtowardstheoptimalgoal.Inthetable-carryingscenario,
the robot keeps rotating the table in the clockwise direction
towards Goal 1, which we assume to be optimal (Fig. 1). The
only way to finish the task is for the human to rotate the table

in the same direction as the robot, until it is brought to the the starting state of the task, where the table was slightly
horizontal configuration of Fig. 1a-top. rotated in the counter-clockwise direction, making the sub-
Mutual-adaptation session The robot executes the MOMDP optimal Goal 2 appear closer. Once the task started, the user
policy computed using the proposed formalism. The robot chose the rotation actions by clicking on buttons on a user
starts by rotating the table towards the optimal goal (Goal interface (Fig. 1b). If the robot executed the same action, a
1). Therefore, adapting to the robot strategy corresponds to video played showing the table rotation. Otherwise, the table
rotating the table to the optimal configuration. did not move and a message appeared on the screen notifying
Cross-training session Human and robot train together using theuserthattheytriedtorotatethetableinadifferentdirection
the human-robot cross-training algorithm [2]. The algorithm than the robot. In the Mutual-adaptation and Fixed conditions
consistsofaforwardphaseandarotationphase.Intheforward participants executed the task twice. Each round ended when
phase, the robot executes an initial policy, which we choose the team reached one of the two goal configurations. In the
to be the one that leads to the optimal goal. Therefore, in Cross-training condition, participants executed the forward
the table-carrying scenario, the robot rotates the table in the phaseofthealgorithminthefirstroundandtherotationphase,
clockwise direction towards Goal 1. In the rotation phase, where human and robot switched roles, in the second round.
human and robot switch roles, and the human inputs are used We found that in this task one rotation phase was enough
to update the robot reward function. After the two phases, the for users to successfully demonstrate their preference to the
robot policy is recomputed. robot. Following [2], the robot executed the updated policy
with the participant in a task-execution phase that succeeded
B. Hypotheses
the rotation phase. We asked all participants to answer a post-
H1 Participants will agree more strongly that the robot is experimental questionnaire that used a five-point Likert scale
trustworthy, and will be more satisfied with the team per- to assess their responses to working with the robot. They also
formance in the Mutual-adaptation condition, compared to responded to open-ended questions about their experience.
working with the robot in the Fixed condition. We expected
users to trust more the robot with the learned MOMDP D. Subject Allocation
policy, compared with the robot that executes a fixed strategy
We chose a between-subjects design in order to not bias
ignoring the user’s willingness to adapt. In prior work, a task-
theuserswithpoliciesfrompreviousconditions.Werecruited
level executive that adapted to the human partner significantly
participantsthroughAmazon’sMechanicalTurkservice.Since
improved perceived robot trustworthiness [35]. Additionally,
weareinterestedinexploringhuman-robotmutualadaptation,
working with a human-aware robot that adapted its motions
we disregarded participants that had as initial preference the
had a significant impact on human satisfaction [36].
robot goal. To ensure reliability of the results, we asked all
H2 Participants are more likely to adapt to the robot strategy
participants a control question that tested their attention to
towards the optimal goal in the Mutual-adaptation condition,
the task and eliminated data associated with wrong answers
compared to working with the robot in the Cross-training
to this question, as well as incomplete data. To test their
condition.ThecomputedMOMDPpolicyenablestherobotto
attention to the Likert questionnaire, we included a negative
inferonlinetheadaptabilityofthehumanandguidesadaptive
statementwiththeoppositemeaningtoitspositivecounterpart
users towards more effective strategies. Therefore, we posited
andeliminateddataassociatedwithpositiveornegativeratings
that more subjects would change their strategy when working
to both statements, resulting in a total of 69 samples.
with the robot in the Mutual-adaptation condition, compared
with cross-training with the robot. We note that in the Fixed
E. MOMDP Model
condition all participants ended up changing to the robot
strategy, as this was the only way to complete the task. The observable state variables x of the MOMDP formula-
H3 The robot performance as a teammate, as perceived by tion were the discretized table orientation and the human and
the participants in the Mutual-adaptation condition, will not robot modes for each of the three previous time-steps. We
be worse than in the Cross-training condition. The learned specified two modal policies, each deterministically selecting
MOMDP policy enables the robot to follow the preference rotation actions towards each goal. The size of the observable
of participants that are less adaptive, while guiding towards state-space X was 734 states. We set a history length k = 3
the optimal goal participants that are willing to change their in BAM. We additionally assumed a discrete set of values of
strategy. Therefore, we posited that this behavior would result the adaptability ↵ : 0.0,0.25,0.5,0.75,1.0 . Therefore, the
{ }
onaperceivedrobotperformancenotinferiortothatachieved total size of the MOMDP state-space was 5 734 = 3670
⇥
in the Cross-training condition. states.Thehumanandrobotactionsa ,a weredeterministic
h r
discrete table rotations. We set the reward function R to be
C. Experiment Setting: A Table Carrying Task
positive at the two goal configurations based on their relative
We first instructed participants in the task, and asked them cost,and0elsewhere.Wecomputedtherobotpolicyusingthe
to choose one of the two goal configurations (Fig. 1a), as SARSOP solver [37], a point-based approximation algorithm
their preferred way of accomplishing the task. To prompt which, combined with the MOMDP formulation, can scale up
users to prefer the sub-optimal goal, we informed them about to hundreds of thousands of states [15].

1
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=0
1
1-step
3-step
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=1
1
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=2
1
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=3
1
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=4
1
0
0 ↵ 1
)↵(P
T=5
Fig.6:(Toprow)Beliefupdateforthe1-stepand3-stepboundedmemorymodelsatsuccessivetime-steps.(Middle/bottomrow)Tableconfigurationinthe
1-step/3-step trial. (T = 1) After the first disagreement and in the absence of any previous history, the belief remains uniform over ↵. The human (white
dot) follows their modal policy from the previous time-step, therefore at T = 2 the belief becomes higher for smaller values of ↵ in both models (lower
adaptability).(T =2)Therobot(orangedotfor1-step,bluedotfor3-step)adaptstothehumanandexecutesthehumanmodalpolicy.Atthesametime,the
humanswitchestotherobotmode,thereforeatT =3theprobabilitymassmovestotheright.(T =3)Thehumanswitchesbacktotheirinitialmode.In
the3-stepmodeltheresultingdistributionatT =4hasapositiveskewness:therobotestimatesthehumantobenotadaptive.Inthe1-stepmodeltherobot
incorrectly infers that the human adapted to the robot mode of the previous time-step, and the probability distribution has a negative skewness. (T =4,5)
Therobotinthe3-steptrialswitchestothehumanmodalpolicy,whereasinthe1-steptrialitdoesnotadapttothehuman,whoinsistsontheirmode.
VII. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION participants in the Mutual-adaptation condition (r = 0.066).
 
We attribute this to the MOMDP formulation allowing the
A. Subjective Measures
robot to reason over its estimate on the adaptability of its
We consider hypothesis H1, that participants will agree
teammate and change its own strategy when interacting with
more strongly that the robot is trustworthy, and will be more
non-adaptive participants, therefore maintaining human trust.
satisfied with the team performance in the Mutual-adaptation
Interestingly,whenaskedtocommentontherobotbehavior,
condition, compared to working with the robot in the Fixed
several adaptive participants in both conditions attempted to
condition. A two-tailed Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test showed
justify the robot actions, stating that “probably there was no
that participants indeed agreed more strongly that the robot
roomtorotate[counter-clockwise],”andthat“maybetherobot
utilizingtheproposedformalismistrustworthy(U =180,p=
could not move backwards.” Some non-adaptive participants
0.048). No statistically significant differences were found for
intheFixedconditionusedstrongerlanguage,notingthat“the
responses to statements eliciting human satisfaction: “I was
robot is incapable of adapting to my efforts,” and that it was
satisfied with the robot and my performance” and “The robot
“stubbornandwouldnotletusturninthedirectionthatwould
and I collaborated well together.” One possible explanation
make me do the least amount of work.” On the other hand,
is that participants interacted with the robot through a user
non-adaptive participants in the Mutual-adaptation condition
interface for a short period of time, therefore the impact of
mentioned that the robot “attempted to anticipate my moves”
the interaction on user satisfaction was limited.
and “understood which way I wanted to go.”
We were also interested in observing how the ratings in
Recall hypothesis H3: that the robot performance as a
the first two conditions varied, depending on the participants’
teammate in the Mutual-adaptation condition, as perceived by
willingness to change their strategy. Therefore, we conducted
theparticipants,wouldnotbeworsethanintheCross-training
apost-hocexperimentalanalysisofthedata,groupingthepar-
condition. We define “not worse than” similarly to [38] using
ticipantsbasedontheiradaptability.Sincethetrueadaptability
the concept of “non-inferiority” [39]. An one-tailed unpaired
of each participant is unknown, we estimated it by the mode
t-test for a non-inferiority margin  = 0 .5 and a level of
of the belief formed by the robot at the end of the task on the
statistical significance ↵ = 0.025 showed that participants
adaptability ↵:
in the Mutual-adaptation condition rated their satisfaction on
↵ˆ =arg max b(↵) (4)
robotperformance(p=0.006),robotintelligence(p=0.024),
↵
robot trustworthiness (p < 0.001), quality of robot actions
We considered only users whose mode was larger than a
(p < 0.001) and quality of collaboration (p = 0.002) not
confidence threshold and grouped them as very adaptive if
worse than participants in the Cross-training condition. This
↵ˆ> 0.75, moderately adaptive if 0.5 < ↵ˆ 0.75 and
 supports hypothesis H3 of Sec. VI-B.
non-adaptive if ↵ˆ 0.5. Fig. 7b shows the participants’

rating of their agreement on the robot trustworthiness, as a
B. Quantitative Measures
function of the participants’ group for the two conditions.
In the Fixed condition there was a trend towards positive To test hypothesis H2, we consider the ratio of participants
correlation between the annotated robot trustworthiness and that changed their strategy to the robot strategy towards
participants’ inferred adaptability (Pearson’s r = 0.452, p = the optimal goal in the Mutual-adaptation and Cross-training
0.091), whereas there was no correlation between the two for conditions.Achangewasdetectedwhentheparticipantstated

20
15
10
5
0
Mutual-adaptation Cross-training
stnapicitrapfo#
5
Adapted Didnotadapt 4
3
2
1
Non- Moderately Very
adaptive Adaptive Adaptive
ParticipantType
(a)
gnitaR
in this task. Fig. 6 shows the belief update and robot behavior
for k =1 and k =3, in the case of mode oscillation.
D. Discussion
Mutual-adaptation
Fixed
These results show that the proposed formalism enables a
human-robot team to achieve more effective policies, com-
pared to state-of-the-art human-robot team training practices,
while achieving subjective ratings on robot performance and
(b)
trust that are comparable to those achieved by these practices.
Fig. 7: (a) Number of participants that adapted to the robot for the Mutual- It is important to note that the comparison with the human-
adaptationandCross-trainingconditions.(b)Ratingofagreementtostatement
robotcross-trainingalgorithmisdoneinthecontextofhuman
“Therobotistrustworthy.”Notethatthefiguredoesnotincludeparticipants,
whose mode of the belief on their adaptability was below a confidence adaptation. Previous work [2] has shown that switching roles
thresholdandthereforewerenotclusteredintoanyofthethreegroups. can result in significant benefits in team fluency metrics,
such as human idle time and concurrent motion [40], when a
humanexecutesthetaskwithanactualrobot.Additionally,the
as preferred strategy a table rotation towards Goal 2 (Fig. 1a-
proposed formalism assumes as input a set of modal policies,
bottom), but completed the task in the configuration of Goal
as well as a quality measure associated with each policy. On
1 (Fig. 1a-top) in the final round of the Mutual-adaptation
theotherhand,cross-trainingrequiresonlyaninitializationof
session, or in the task-execution phase of the Cross-training
a reward function of the state space, which is then updated
session. As Fig. 7a shows, 57% of participants adapted to
in the rotation phase through interaction. It would be very
the robot in the Mutual-adaptation condition, whereas 26%
interesting to explore a hybrid approach between learning the
adapted to the robot in the Cross-training condition. A Pear-
reward function and guiding the human towards an optimal
son’s chi-square test showed that the difference is statistically
policy, but we leave this for future work.
significant ( 2(1,N = 46) = 4.39,p = 0.036). Therefore,
participants that interacted with the robot of the proposed E. Generalization to Complex Tasks
formalism were more likely to switch to the robot strategy
The presented table-carrying task can be generalized with-
towards the optimal goal, than participants that cross-trained
out any modifications in the proposed mathematical model,
with the robot, which supports our hypothesis.
with the cost of increasing the size of the state-space and
In Sec. VII-C, we discuss the robot behavior for different
action-space. In particular, we made the assumptions: (1)
values of history length k in BAM.
discrete time-steps, where human and robot apply torques
C. Selection of History Length causingafixedtable-rotation. (2)binaryhuman-robotactions.
The value of k in BAM indicates the number of time- We discuss how we can relax these assumptions:
steps in the past that we assume humans consider in their 1) Wecanapproximateacontinuous-timesettingbyincreas-
decisionmakingonaparticulartask,ignoringallotherhistory. ing the resolution of the time discretization. Assuming a
Increasing k results in an exponential increase of the state constant displacement per unittime v and a time-step dt,
spacesize,withlargevaluesreducingtherobotresponsiveness the size of the state-space increases linearly with (1/dt):
to changes in the human behavior. On the other hand, very O(X world M 2k)=O((✓ max ✓ min ) (1/v) (1/dt)
| || |   ⇤ ⇤ ⇤
small values result in unrealistic assumptions on the human M 2k), where ✓ is the rotation angle of the table.
| |
decision making process. 2) The proposed formalism is not limited to binary actions.
To illustrate this, we set k =1 and ran a pilot study of 30 For instance, we can allow torque inputs of different
participants through Amazon-Turk. Whereas most users rated magnitudes. The action-space of the MOMDP increases
highlytheiragreementtoquestionsassessingtheirsatisfaction linearly with the number of possible inputs.
andtrusttotherobot,someparticipantsexpressedtheirstrong Finally, we note that the presented formalism does not rely
dissatisfaction with the robot behavior. This occurred when on any features of the table-carrying task. For instance, we
human and robot oscillated back and forth between modes, couldapplyourformalisminthecasewherehumanandrobot
similarly to when two pedestrians on a narrow street face cross a hallway and coordinate to avoid collision, and the
each other and switch sides simultaneously until they reach robot guides the human towards the right side of the corridor.
an agreement. In this case, which occurred in 23% of the Alternatively, in an assembly manufacturing task the robot
samples, when the human switched back to their initial mode, could lead the human to strategies that require less time or
which was also the robot mode of the previous time-step, the resources.
robot incorrectly inferred them as adaptive. However, the user
in fact resumed their initial mode followed before two time-
VIII. CONCLUSION
steps, implying a tendency for non-adaptation. This is a case We presented a formalism for human-robot mutual adap-
where the 1-step bounded memory assumption did not hold. tation, which enables guiding the human teammate towards
InthehumansubjectexperimentofSecVI,weusedk =3, moreefficientstrategies,whilemaintaininghumantrustinthe
sincewefoundthistodescribeaccuratelythehumanbehavior robot. First, we proposed BAM, a model of human adaptation

based on a bounded memory assumption. The model is pa- [10] M. N. Nicolescu and M. J. Mataric, “Natural methods for robot task
rameterizedbytheadaptabilityofthehumanteammate,which learning: Instructive demonstrations, generalization and practice,” in
AAMAS,2003.
takes into account individual differences in people’s willing-
[11] S. Chernova and M. Veloso, “Teaching multi-robot coordination using
ness to adapt to the robot. We then integrated BAM into a demonstrationofcommunicationandstatesharing,”inAAMAS,2008.
MOMDPformulation,whereintheadaptabilitywasapartially [12] B.Akgun,M.Cakmak,J.W.Yoo,andA.L.Thomaz,“Trajectoriesand
keyframesforkinestheticteaching:ahuman-robotinteractionperspec-
observable variable. In a human subject experiment (n=69),
tive,”inHRI,2012.
participants were significantly more likely to adapt to the [13] O.LemonandO.Pietquin,Data-DrivenMethodsforAdaptiveSpoken
robot strategy towards the optimal goal when working with a Dialogue Systems: Computational Learning for Conversational Inter-
faces. SpringerPublishingCompany,Incorporated,2012.
robot utilizing our formalism (p=0.036), compared to cross-
[14] F.Broz,I.Nourbakhsh,andR.Simmons,“Designingpomdpmodelsof
training with the robot. Additionally, participants found the sociallysituatedtasks,”inRO-MAN,2011.
performance as a teammate of the robot executing the learned [15] T. Bandyopadhyay, K. S. Won, E. Frazzoli, D. Hsu, W. S. Lee, and
D.Rus,“Intention-awaremotionplanning,”inWAFR. Springer,2013.
MOMDP policy to be not worse than the performance of the
[16] T.-H. D. Nguyen, D. Hsu, W. S. Lee, T.-Y. Leong, L. P. Kaelbling,
robotthatcross-trainedwiththeparticipants.Finally,therobot T.Lozano-Perez,andA.H.Grant,“Capir:Collaborativeactionplanning
was found to be more trustworthy with the learned policy, withintentionrecognition.”inAIIDE,2011.
[17] O. Macindoe, L. P. Kaelbling, and T. Lozano-Pe´rez, “Pomcop: Belief
compared with executing an optimal strategy while ignoring
spaceplanningforsidekicksincooperativegames.”inAIIDE,2012.
humanadaptability(p=0.048).Theseresultsindicatethatthe [18] S. Nikolaidis, R. Ramakrishnan, K. Gu, and J. Shah, “Efficient model
proposedformalismcansignificantlyimprovetheeffectiveness learningfromjoint-actiondemonstrationsforhuman-robotcollaborative
tasks,”inHRI,2015.
of human-robot teams, while achieving subjective ratings on
[19] E.Karpas,S.J.Levine,P.Yu,andB.C.Williams,“Robustexecution
robot performance and trust comparable to those of state-of- ofplansforhuman-robotteams,”inICAPS,2015.
the-art human-robot team training strategies. [20] M.A.GoodrichandA.C.Schultz,“Human-robotinteraction:asurvey,”
Foundationsandtrendsinhuman-computerinteraction,2007.
We have shown that BAM can adequately capture human
[21] B. Robins, K. Dautenhahn, R. Te Boekhorst, and A. Billard, “Effects
behavior in a collaborative task with well-defined task-steps ofrepeatedexposuretoahumanoidrobotonchildrenwithautism,”in
onarelativelyfast-paceddomain.However,indomainswhere Designingamoreinclusiveworld,2004.
[22] T. Kanda, T. Hirano, D. Eaton, and H. Ishiguro, “Interactive robots
peopletypicallyreflectonalonghistoryofinteractions,oron
as social partners and peer tutors for children: A field trial,” Human-
the beliefs of the other agents, such as in a Poker game [41], computerinteraction,2004.
peoplearelikelytodemonstratemuchmorecomplexadaptive [23] A. Green and H. Httenrauch, “Making a case for spatial prompting in
human-robotcommunication,inmultimodalcorpora:Frommultimodal
behavior. Developing sophisticated predictive models for such
behaviourtheoriestousablemodels,”inworkshopatLREC,2006.
domains and integrating them into robot decision making in a [24] S.Ikemoto,H.B.Amor,T.Minato,B.Jung,andH.Ishiguro,“Physical
principled way, while maintaining computational tractability, human-robotinteraction:Mutuallearningandadaptation,”IEEERobot.
Autom.Mag.,2012.
is an exciting area for future work.
[25] A.DraganandS.Srinivasa,“Generatinglegiblemotion,”inRSS,2013.
[26] D.FudenbergandJ.Tirole,“Gametheorymitpress,”1991.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS [27] D.FudenbergandD.K.Levine,Thetheoryoflearningingames. MIT
press,1998.
We thank Michael Koval and Shervin Javdani for very help-
[28] R.PowersandY.Shoham,“Learningagainstopponentswithbounded
ful discussion and advice. This work was funded by the DARPA memory.”inIJCAI,2005.
SIMPLEX program through ARO contract number 67904LSDRP, [29] D.Monte,“Learningwithboundedmemoryingames,”GEB,2014.
[30] R. J. Aumann and S. Sorin, “Cooperation and bounded recall,” GEB,
NationalInstituteofHealthR01(#R01EB019335),NationalScience
1989.
Foundation CPS (#1544797), and the Office of Naval Research. We [31] H.A.Simon,“Rationaldecisionmakinginbusinessorganizations,”The
also acknowledge the Onassis Foundation as a sponsor. Americaneconomicreview,pp.493–513,1979.
[32] D.Kahneman,“Mapsofboundedrationality:Psychologyforbehavioral
economics,”Americaneconomicreview,pp.1449–1475,2003.
REFERENCES
[33] R.Platt,R.Tedrake,L.Kaelbling,andT.Lozano-Perez,“Beliefspace
[1] J. E. Mathieu et al., “The influence of shared mental models on team planningassumingmaximumlikelihoodobservations,”inRSS,2010.
processandperformance.”Journalofappliedpsychology,2000. [34] A. Dragan and S. Srinivasa, “Formalizing assistive teleoperation,” in
[2] S.NikolaidisandJ.Shah,“Human-robotcross-training:computational RSS,2012.
formulation,modelingandevaluationofahumanteamtrainingstrategy,” [35] J. Shah, J. Wiken, B. Williams, and C. Breazeal, “Improved human-
inHRI,2013. robotteamperformanceusingchaski,ahuman-inspiredplanexecution
[3] P. A. Hancock, D. R. Billings, K. E. Schaefer, J. Y. Chen, E. J. system,”inHRI,2011.
De Visser, and R. Parasuraman, “A meta-analysis of factors affecting [36] P. A. Lasota and J. A. Shah, “Analyzing the effects of human-aware
trustinhuman-robotinteraction,”HumanFactors,2011. motionplanningonclose-proximityhuman–robotcollaboration,”Hum.
[4] M.Salem,G.Lakatos,F.Amirabdollahian,andK.Dautenhahn,“Would Factors,2015.
youtrusta(faulty)robot?:Effectsoferror,tasktypeandpersonalityon [37] H. Kurniawati, D. Hsu, and W. S. Lee, “Sarsop: Efficient point-based
human-robotcooperationandtrust,”inHRI,2015. pomdp planning by approximating optimally reachable belief spaces.”
[5] J.J.Lee,W.B.Knox,J.B.Wormwood,C.Breazeal,andD.DeSteno, inRSS,2008.
“Computationallymodelinginterpersonaltrust,”Front.Psychol.,2013. [38] A. D. Dragan, S. S. Srinivasa, and K. C. Lee, “Teleoperation with
[6] S. C. Ong, S. W. Png, D. Hsu, and W. S. Lee, “Planning under intelligentandcustomizableinterfaces,”JHRI,2013.
uncertaintyforrobotictaskswithmixedobservability,”IJRR,2010. [39] E. Lesaffre, “Superiority, equivalence, and non-inferiority trials,” Bul-
[7] B.D.Argall,S.Chernova,M.Veloso,andB.Browning,“Asurveyof letinoftheNYUhospitalforjointdiseases,2008.
robotlearningfromdemonstration,”Robot.Auton.Syst.,2009. [40] G.HoffmanandC.Breazeal,“Effectsofanticipatoryactiononhuman-
[8] C.G.AtkesonandS.Schaal,“Robotlearningfromdemonstration,”in robot teamwork efficiency, fluency, and perception of team,” in HRI,
ICML,1997. 2007.
[9] P.AbbeelandA.Y.Ng,“Apprenticeshiplearningviainversereinforce- [41] J. Von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of games and economic
mentlearning,”inICML,2004. behavior. Princetonuniversitypress,2007.