Article
TheInternationalJournalof
Human-robot mutual adaptation in RoboticsResearch
2017,Vol.36(5–7)618–634
©TheAuthor(s)2017
collaborative tasks: Models and
Reprintsandpermissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
experiments
DOI:10.1177/0278364917690593
journals.sagepub.com/home/ijr
StefanosNikolaidis1,DavidHsu2 andSiddharthaSrinivasa1
Abstract
Adaptationiscriticalforeffectiveteamcollaboration.Thispaperintroducesacomputationalformalismformutualadap-
tationbetweenarobotandahumanincollaborativetasks.WeproposetheBounded-MemoryAdaptationModel,which
is a probabilistic finite-state controller that captures human adaptive behaviors under a bounded-memory assumption.
We integrate the Bounded-Memory Adaptation Model into a probabilistic decision process, enabling the robot to guide
adaptable participants towards a better way of completing the task. Human subject experiments suggest that the pro-
posed formalism improves the effectiveness of human-robot teams in collaborative tasks, when compared with one-way
adaptationsoftherobottothehuman,whilemaintainingthehuman’strustintherobot.
Keywords
Human-robotcollaboration,mutual-adaptation,planningunderuncertainty
1. Introduction though sub-optimally. If the robot insists on its own pref-
erence,GoalA,itmaylosethehuman’strust,leadingtoa
Robots are entering our homes and workplaces, comple-
deterioratingteamperformanceorevendisuseoftherobot
menting human abilities and skills in many application
(Hancocketal.,2011;Leeetal.,2013;Salemetal.,2015).
domains, including manufacturing, health-care, etc. They
The challenge is that when encountering a new human
co-existinthesamephysicalspacewithhumansandaimto
partner,therobotmaynotknowhisorheradaptabilityand
becometrustworthypartnersinateam.Researchonhuman
mustlearnitontheflythroughinteraction.
teams shows that mutual adaptation, which requires all
In this work, we propose a computational model for
team-members involved to adapt their behaviors to fulfill
human-robot mutual adaptation in collaborative tasks. We
common team goals, significantly improves team perfor-
buildamodelofhumanadaptivebehaviorsandintegratethe
mance (Mathieu et al., 2000). We believe that the same
model into a probabilistic decision process. One key idea
holds for human-robot teams. Our main goal in this work
here is the Bounded-Memory Adaptation Model (BAM),
is to develop a computational framework for human-robot
which is a probabilistic finite-state controller that captures
mutualadaptation.
human adaptive behaviors. The BAM assumes that the
Consider, for example, the table-carrying task in
human operates in one of several collaboration “modes”
Figure1. A human and HERB (Srinivasa et al., 2010), an
andadaptsthebehaviorbyswitchingamongthemodes.To
autonomous mobile manipulator, work together to carry
chooseanewmode,thehumanmaintainsafinitehistoryof
a table out of a room. There are two strategies: the robot
pastinteractionsandswitchestothenewmodeprobabilisti-
facing the door (Goal A) or the robot facing away from
callyaccordingtotheadaptabilitylevel.Thehuman’sadapt-
the door (Goal B). Assume that the robot prefers Goal A,
ability level is a BAM model parameter unknown to the
as the robot’s forward-facing sensor has a clear view of
the door, leading to better task performance. Not aware of
this, an inexperienced human partner may prefer Goal B.
1TheRoboticsInstitute,CarnegieMellonUniversity,USA
2DepartmentofComputerScience,NationalUniversityofSingapore,
Intuitively,ifthehumanisadaptableandwillingtoaccom-
Singapore
modate the robot, the robot guides the human towards
Goal A, which provides a better task performance overall. Correspondingauthor:
StefanosNikolaidis,CarnegieMellonUniversityRoboticsInstitute,5000
Ifthehumanisnotadaptableandinsistsonhisownprefer-
ForbesAvePittsburgh,PA15213,USA.
ence,therobotthencompliesinordertocompletethetask, Email:snikolai@andrew.cmu.edu

Nikolaidisetal. 619
Fig.1. Ahumanandarobotcollaboratetocarryatablethroughadoor.(a)Therobotprefersfacingthedoor(GoalA),asithasafull
viewofthedoor.(b)Therobotfacesawayfromthedoor(GoalB).
robotapriori.Toworkwithsuchanadaptablehumaneffec- wanttoemphasizeherethattherobotexecutesasinglepol-
tively, the robot must consider two sometimes conflicting icythatadaptstodifferenthumanbehaviors.Ifthehumanis
objectives: non-adaptable,therobotcompliestothehuman’spreferred
strategy. Otherwise, the robot guides the human towards a
• gather information on the unknown parameter through
betterstrategy.
interaction,inordertodecidebetweencomplyingwith
We are interested in studying whether a robot, under
thehuman’spreferenceandguidingthehumantowards
our proposed approach, is able to guide human partners
abettercooperationmodefortaskcompletion;
towards a better collaboration strategy, sometimes against
• choose actions towards the goal, e.g. moving the table
their initial preference, while still retaining their trust. We
outoftheroom.
conducted a human subject experiment online via video
Wetreattheunknownmodelparameterasalatentvariable playback (n = 69) on the simulated table carrying task
and embed the BAM in a probabilistic decision process, (Figure1).Intheexperiment,participantsweresignificantly
called the Mixed Observability Markov Decision Process morelikelytoadapt,whenworkingwiththerobotutilizing
(MOMDP) (Ong et al., 2010), for choosing robot actions. our mutually adaptive approach, when compared with the
The computed MOMDP policy optimally balances the robotthatcross-trainedwiththeparticipants.Additionally,
tradeoff between gathering information on human adapt- theparticipantsfoundthatthemutuallyadaptiverobothas
ability and moving towards the goal. Since the MOMDP performancenotworsethanthecross-trainedrobot.Finally,
model has the BAM embedded within, the chosen actions theparticipantsfoundthatthemutuallyadaptiverobotwas
enable the robot to adapt to an adaptive human, thus more trustworthy than the robot in executing a fixed strat-
achievingmutualadaptationasaresult. egy optimal in task performance, but ignoring the human
Our work contrasts with earlier approaches that rely on preference.
one-wayadaptationoftherobottothehuman,suchascross- We are also interested in how adaptability and trust
training (Nikolaidis and Shah, 2013), a state-of-the-art change over time. We hypothesized that trust in the mutu-
methodforhuman-robotteamtraining.One-wayadaptation ally adaptive robot increases over time for non-adaptable
focuses on computing a robot policy aligned with human participants, as previous work suggests that robot adap-
preference.Itignoresthatthehumanpreferencemayresult tation significantly improves perceived robot trustworthi-
insuboptimaltaskperformance,asourexampleshows.Fur- ness(Shahetal.,2011),andthattheincreaseintrustresults
ther,wecannotresolvethisissuebyhavingtherobotinsist inasubsequentincreasedlikelihoodofhumanadaptationto
on executing an optimal policy against the human’s pref- the robot. A human subject experiment on repeated table-
erence. This may erode the human’s trust in the robot and carryingtasks(n=43)didnotsupportthishypothesis.
leadtodeterioratingteamperformanceovertime(Hancock To study the generality of our model, we hypothesized
etal.,2011;Leeetal.,2013;Salemetal.,2015). that non-adaptable participants in the table-carrying task
Figure 2 shows examples of human and robot behav- would be less likely to adapt in a different collabora-
iors for three simulated humans in the table-carrying task tive task. A follow-up human subject experiment with a
(Figure1).Therobotestimatestheunknownhumanadapt- hallway-crossingtask(n=58)confirmedthehypothesis.
ability through interaction. User 1 is fully non-adaptable Inthefollowing,Section2reviewsrelatedwork.Section
withα =0.Therobotinfersthisaftertwostepsofinterac- 3 formally describes the problem setting. Section 4 and 5
tionandswitchesitsactiontocomplywiththehumanpref- presents BAM, the proposed model of human adaptation,
erence.User3isfullyadaptablewithα =1andswitchesto and the integration of BAM in the robot decision making
accommodatetherobotpreferenceafteronestepofinterac- process using an MOMDP formulation. Section 6 and 7
tion.User2isadaptablewithα =0.75.Afterseveralsteps, describes our human subject experiments and presents
the robot gets a good estimate on the human adaptability the main findings that suggest significant improvement
level and guides the human to the preferred strategy. We in human-robot team effectiveness, while human subject

620 TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch36(5–7)
Fig.2. Samplerunsonthehuman-robottable-carryingtask,withthreesimulatedhumansofadaptabilitylevelα = 0,0.75,and1.A
fullyadaptablehumanhasα = 1,whileafullynon-adaptablehumanhasα = 0.Ineachcase,theupperrowshowstheprobabilistic
estimateonαovertime.Thelowerrowshowstherobotandhumanactionsovertime.Redcolorindicateshuman(whitedot)androbot
(blackdot)disagreementintheiractions,inwhichcasethetabledoesnotmove.Thecolumnsindicatesuccessivetimesteps.User1is
non-adaptable,andtherobotcomplieswithhispreference.Users2and3areadaptabletodifferentextent.Therobotsuccessfullyguides
themtowardsabetterstrategy.
ratings on the robot performance and trust are compara- applications.Onesuchstudy(Nguyenetal.,2011)focused
ble to those achieved by cross-training, a state-of-the-art on inferring the intentions of a human player, allowing a
human-robotteamtrainingpractice.Finally,wediscussthe non-player character (NPC) to assist the human. Alterna-
effects of repeated trials on participants’ adaptability over tively,Macindoeetal.(2012)proposedthepartiallyobserv-
time in Section 8 and the transfer of adaptability across able Monte-Carlo cooperative planning system, in which
tasksinSection9. human intention is inferred for a turn-based game. Niko-
laidis et al. (2015) proposed a formalism to learn human
types from joint-action demonstrations, infer online the
2. Relevantwork
type of a new user and compute a robot policy aligned
Therehasbeenextensiveworkonone-wayrobotadaptation to their preferences. Simultaneous intent inference and
to humans. Approaches involve a human expert providing robot adaptation has also been achieved through propaga-
demonstrations to teach the robot a skill or a specific task tionofstateandtemporalconstraints(Karpasetal.,2015).
(Argalletal.,2009;AtkesonandSchaal,1997;Abbeeland Anotherapproachhasbeenthehuman-robotcross-training
Ng,2004;Akgunetal.,2012;ChernovaandVeloso,2008; algorithm, where the human demonstrates their preference
Nicolescu and Mataric, 2003). Robots have also been able byswitchingroleswiththerobot,shapingtherobotreward
to infer the human preference online through interaction. function (Nikolaidis and Shah, 2013). Although it is pos-
Inparticular,partiallyobservableMarkovdecisionprocess siblethatthehumanchangesstrategiesduringthetraining,
(POMDP) models have allowed reasoning over the uncer- the algorithm does not use a model of human adaptation
tainty on the human intention (Broz et al., 2011; Doshi thatcanenabletherobottoactivelyinfluencetheactionsof
andRoy,2007;LemonandPietquin,2012).TheMOMDP itshumanpartner.
formulation (Ong et al., 2010) has been shown to achieve There have also been studies in human adaptation to
significant computational efficiency and has been used in the robot. Previous work has focused on operator train-
motionplanningapplications(Bandyopadhyayetal.,2013). ingformilitary,space,andsearch-and-rescueapplications,
Recent work has also inferred human intention through with the goal of reducing the operator workload and oper-
decomposition of a game task into subtasks for game AI ational risk (Goodrich and Schultz, 2007). Additionally,

Nikolaidisetal. 621
researchers have studied the effects of repeated interac-
tions with a humanoid robot on the interaction skills of
children with autism (Robins et al., 2004), on language
skills of elementary school students (Kanda et al., 2004),
aswellasonusers’spatialbehavior(GreenandHÃ¼tten-
rauch,2006).Humanadaptationhasalsobeenobservedin
anassistivewalkingtask,wheretherobotuseshumanfeed-
back to improve its behavior, which in turn influences the
Fig. 3. Integration of BAM (Bounded-Memory Adaptation
physical support provided by the human (Ikemoto et al.,
Model) into MOMDP (Mixed Observability Markov Decision
2012). While the changes in the human behavior are an
Process)formulation.
essential part of the learning process, the system does not
explicitlyreasonoverthehumanadaptationthroughoutthe
interaction.Ontheotherhand,DraganandSrinivasa(2013)
assume that the human acts according to an adaptive
proposed a probabilistic model of the inference made by
stochastic policy πH : Xworld × H → 5(AH), which
t
a human observer over the robot goals, and introduced a
chooses the next action stochastically based on the cur-
motion generating algorithm to maximize this inference
rent world state xworld and the history of interactions h =
t
towardsapredefinedgoal.
xworld(0),aR(0),aH(0),...,xworld(t−1),aR(t−1),aH(t−
(cid:0)
Theproposedformalismofhuman-robotmutualadapta-
1) . Specifically, BAM, our proposed model of human
(cid:1)
tion is an attempt to close the loop between the two lines
adaptation,definesasetM ofmodalpoliciesormodesand
ofresearch.Therobotleveragesahumanadaptationmodel
assumesthatthehumanswitchesamongthemodesstochas-
parameterizedbyhumanadaptability.Itreasonsprobabilis-
tically. A mode µ: Xworld × H × AR × AH → {0,1} is a
t
tically over the different ways that the human may change
deterministic policy that maps the current world state and
thestrategyandadaptsitsownactionstoguidethehuman
historytojointhuman-robotactions.Ateachtimestep,the
towardsamoreeffectivestrategywhenpossible.
humanfollowsamodeµH ∈M andobservesthattherobot
Mutual adaptation between agents has been studied
followsamodeµR ∈ M.Tocollaboratewiththerobot,the
extensively in game theory (Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991).
humanmayswitchtoµR atthenexttimestep,withproba-
Game theory often relies on strong assumptions on the
bilityα.Ifα = 1,thehumanswitchestoµR almostsurely.
rationalityofagentsandtheknowledgeofpayofffunctions.
If α = 0, the human insists on the original mode µH and
These assumptions may not be suitable when agents are
does not adapt at all. Intuitively, α captures the human’s
unable or unwilling to reason about optimal strategies for
inclinationtoadapt.
themselvesorothers(FudenbergandLevine,1998).Thisis
If the human is not adaptable, the robot must switch to
particularlytrueinthehuman-robotteamsetting,whenthe
µH eventually in order to complete the task. If the human
human is unsure about how the robot will act and has lit-
is adaptable and µR provides higher total reward than µH,
tletimetorespond.Weproposeamodelofhumanadaptive
the robot then stays with µR, expecting the human to fol-
behaviorsbasedonaboundedmemoryassumption(Powers
low.Therobotmayinteractwithdifferenthumans,andthe
andShoham,2005;Monte,2014;AumannandSorin,1989)
adaptabilitylevelα ofanewhumanteammateisunknown
andintegrateitintorobotdecisionmaking.
in advance. What shall the robot do? To compute a policy
Thispaperisanextensionofourearlierwork(Nikolaidis
fortherobot,wetreatα asalatentvariableandembedthe
etal.,2016),withanewcollaborativetaskwhereahuman
BAMforthehumaninanMOMDP(Figure3),whichisa
and a robot cross a corridor and with additional human
structured version of the more common Partially Observ-
subjectexperimentsonhumanadaptability.
ableMarkovDecisionProcess(POMDP)(Kaelblingetal.,
1998).ThesolutiontotheMOMDPisarobotpolicyπRthat
estimatesthevalueofαthroughthehistoryofinteractions,
3. Problemsetting
and uses the estimate to predict future human actions and
Ahuman-robotteamcanbetreatedasamulti-agentsystem, choosethebestrobotactionstowardstaskcompletion.The
with world state xworld ∈ Xworld, robot action aR ∈ AR, and policyisoptimalinthesensethatitachievesthemaximum
humanactionaH ∈ AH.Thesystemevolvesaccordingtoa expected total reward among all policies for the human-
stochasticstatetransitionfunctionT: Xworld×AR×AH → robot team, under the assumed human adaptive behavior
5(Xworld).Ateachtimestep,thehuman-robotteamreceives model.
areal-valuedrewardR(xworld,aR,aH).Itsgoalistomaximize Moredetailsaregiveninthenexttwosections.
theexpectedtotalrewardovertime: ∞ γtR(t),wherethe
Pt=0
discountfactorγ ∈[0,1)giveshigherweighttoimmediate
4. Theboundedmemoryadaptation model
rewardsthantofutureones.
The robot and the human choose their actions inde- WemodelthehumanpolicyπHasaprobabilisticfinite-state
pendently. To compute the robot actions that maximize automaton(PFA),withasetofstatesQ:Xworld×H.Ajoint
t
the total reward, we first model the human behavior. We human-robotactionaH,aR triggersanemissionofahuman

622 TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch36(5–7)
androbotmodalpolicyf :Q×M×M →{0,1},aswellas
atransitiontoanewstateP:Q→5(Q).
4.1. Boundedmemoryassumption
Herbert Simon proposed that people often do not have the
Fig.4. TheBAMhumanadaptationmodel.
time and cognitive capabilities to make perfectly rational
decisions, in what he described as “bounded rationality”
4.3. Humanadaptability
(Simon, 1979). This idea has been supported by studies
inpsychologyandeconomics(Kahneman,2003).Ingame We define the adaptability as the probability of the human
theory,boundedrationalityhasbeenmodeledbyassuming switching from their mode to the robot mode. It would be
thatplayershavea“boundedmemory”or“boundedrecall” unrealistic to assume that all users are equally likely to
andbasetheirdecisionsonrecentobservations(Powersand adapt to the robot. Instead, we account for individual dif-
Shoham,2005;Monte,2014;AumannandSorin,1989).In ferencesbyparameterizingthetransitionfunctionPbythe
this work, we introduce the bounded memory assumption adaptabilityα ofanindividual.Then,atstateqthehuman
inahuman-robotcollaborationsetting.Underthisassump- willtransitiontoanewstatebychoosinganactionspecified
tion,humanswillchoosetheiractionbasedonahistoryof byµR withprobabilityα,oranactionspecifiedbyµH with
k-stepsinthepast,sothatQ:Xworld×H k . probability1−α(Figure4).
In order to account for unexpected human behavior, we
assign uniformly a small, non-zero probability (cid:15) for the
4.2. Featureselection humantakingarandomactionofsomemodeotherthanµR,
µH. The parameter (cid:15) plays the role of probability smooth-
The size of the state-space in the PFA can be
ing.Inthetime-stepthatthisoccurs,therobot’sbeliefonα
quite large (|Xworld|k+1|AR|k|AH|k|). Therefore, we approx-
willnotchange.Inthenexttime-step,therobotwillinclude
imate it using a set of features, so that φ(q)=
the previous human action in its inference of the human
{φ (q),φ (q),...,φ (q)}.Wecan choose asfeatures the
1 2 N modeµH.
frequencycountsφH,φR ofthemodalpoliciesfollowedin
µ µ WenotethattheFiniteStateMachineinFigure4shows
theinteractionhistory,sothat
the human mode transition in one time-step only. For
instance,ifthehumanswitchesfromµH toµR andk = 1,
k k
inthenexttime-stepthenewhumanmodeµH willbewhat
φ
µ
H =X[µH
i
=µ] φ
µ
R =X[µR
i
=µ] ∀µ∈M (1)
waspreviouslyµR.Inthatcase,oscillationbetweenµRand
i=1 i=1
µHcanoccur.WediscussthisinSection7.3.
µH andµR isthemodalpolicyofthehumanandtherobot
i i
i time-steps in the past. We note that k defines the history 4.4. Characterizingmodalpolicies
length,withk = 1implyingthatthehumanwillactbased
At each time-step, the human and robot modes are not
only on the previous interaction. Drawing upon insights
directlyobserved,butmustbeinferredfromthehumanand
from previous work which assumes maximum likelihood
robotactions.Thiscanbeachievedbycharacterizingaset
observations for policy computation in belief-space (Platt
ofmodalpoliciesthroughoneofthefollowingways:
et al., 2010), we used as features the modal policies with
themaximumfrequencycount Manualspecification.Insomecasesthemodalpoliciescan
beeasilyspecified.Forinstance,iftwoagentsarecrossing
a corridor (Section 9), there are two deterministic policies
µH =argmaxφH µR =argmaxφR (2)
µ µ leadingtotaskcompletion,oneforeachside.Therefore,we
µ µ
caninferamodedirectlyfromtheactiontaken.
The proposed model does not require a specific feature Learning from demonstration. In previous work, joint-
representation. For instance, we could construct features actiondemonstrationsonahuman-robotcollaborativetask
by combining modal policies µH, µR using an arbitration were clustered into groups and a reward function was
i i
function(DraganandSrinivasa,2012). learnedforeachcluster(Nikolaidisetal.,2015),whichwe
For the case of fully observable modes, it is sufficient canthenassociatewithamode.
to retain only the k-length mode history, rather than H , Planning-based prediction. Previous work assumes that
k
simplifying the problem. In the general case of partially peoplemoveefficientlytoreachdestinationsbyoptimizing
observablemodes,though,thehumanwouldneedtomain- a cost-function, similarly to a goal-based planner (Ziebart
tainaprobabilitydistributionoverrobotmodes,andH may et al., 2009). Given a set of goal-states and a partial tra-
k
be required to model the human inference. We leave this jectory, we can associate modes with predictive models of
caseforfuturework. futureactionstowardsthemostlikelygoal.

Nikolaidisetal. 623
Thepolicyexecutionisperformedonlineinrealtimeand
consists of two steps (Figure 3). First, the robot uses the
currentbelieftoselecttheactionaRspecifiedbythepolicy.
Second,itusesthehumanactionaHtoupdatethebeliefonα
(equation(3)).Figure5presentsthepathsontheMOMDP
policytreethatcorrespondtothesimulateduserbehaviors
presented in Figure 2. Figure 6 shows instances of actual
user behaviors in the human subject experiment described
inSection6.
6. Humansubjectexperiment
We conducted a human subject experiment on a simulated
table-carryingtask(Figure1)toevaluatetheproposedfor-
Fig.5. DifferentpathsonMOMDPpolicytreeforhuman-robot
malism. We were interested in showing that integrating
(white/blackdot)table-carryingtask.Thecirclecolorrepresents
BAMintotherobotdecisionmakingcanleadtomoreeffi-
thebeliefonα,withdarkershadesindicatinghigherprobability
cient policies than the state-of-the-art human-robot team
for smaller values (less adaptability). The white circles denote a
training practices, while maintaining human satisfaction
uniformdistributionoverα.User1isinferredasnon-adaptable,
andtrust.
whereasUsers2and3areadaptable.
Ononeextreme,wecan“fix”therobotpolicysothatthe
robot always moves towards the optimal —with respect to
someobjectiveperformancemetric—goal,ignoringhuman
Computation of nash equilibria. Following a game-
adaptability.Thiswillforcealluserstoadapt,sincethisis
theoreticapproach,wecanviewtheinteractionasastochas-
the only way to complete the task. However, we hypothe-
ticgameandrestrictthesetofmodalpoliciestotheequilib-
size that this will significantly impact human satisfaction
riumstrategies.Forinstance,wecanformulatetheexample
and trust in the robot. On the other extreme, we can effi-
of human and robot crossing a corridor as a coordination
ciently learn the human preference (Nikolaidis and Shah,
game, where strategies of both agents moving on opposite
2013). This can lead to the human-robot team following a
sidesstrictlydominatestrategieswheretheycollide.
sub-optimal policy, if the human has an inaccurate model
of the robot capabilities. We have, therefore, two control
5. Robotplanning
conditions: one where participants interact with the robot
In this section we describe the integration of BAM in the executingafixedpolicy,alwaysactingtowardstheoptimal
robotdecisionmakingprocessusinganMOMDPformula- goal,andonewheretherobotlearnsthehumanpreference.
tion.AnMOMDPusesproperfactorizationoftheobserv- We show that the proposed formalism achieves a trade-
ableandunobservablestatevariablesS : X ×Y withtran- off between the two: When the human is non-adaptable,
sitionfunctionsT andT ,reducingthecomputationalload the robotfollowsthe human strategy. Otherwise,therobot
x y
(Ong et al., 2010). The set of observable state variables is insistsontheoptimalwayofcompletingthetask,leadingto
X :Xworld×Mk ×Mk,whereXworld isthefinitesetoftask- significantlybetterpoliciescomparedtolearningthehuman
stepsthatsignifytheprogresstowardstaskcompletionand preference.
M is the set of modal policies followed by the human and
therobotinahistorylengthk.Thepartiallyobservablevari-
6.1. Independentvariables
ableyisidenticaltothehumanadaptabilityα.Weassume
finite sets of human and robot actions AH and AR, and we Wehadthreeexperimentalconditions,whichwerefertoas
denote as πH the stochastic human policy. The latter gives “Fixed,”“Mutual-adaptation”,and“Cross-training.”
theprobabilityofahumanactionaHatstates,basedonthe Fixedsession.Therobotexecutesafixedpolicy,alwaysact-
BAMhumanadaptationmodel. ingtowardstheoptimalgoal.Inthetable-carryingscenario,
GivenaR ∈ARandaH ∈AH,thebeliefupdatebecomes therobotkeepsrotatingthetableintheclockwisedirection
towardsGoalA,whichweassumetobeoptimal(Figure1).
b0(y0)=ηO(s0,aR,o)X T
x
(s,aR,aH,x0) Theonlywaytofinishthetaskisforthehumantorotatethe
y∈Y (3) tableinthesamedirectionastherobot,untilitisbroughtto
T (s,aR,aH,s0)πH(s,aH)b(y) thehorizontalconfigurationofFigure1a.
y
Mutual-adaptation session. The robot executes the
We use a point-based approximation algorithm to solve MOMDP policy computed using the proposed formalism.
the MOMDP for a robot policy πR that takes into account The robot starts by rotating the table towards the optimal
therobotbeliefonthehumanadaptability,whilemaximiz- goal(GoalA).Therefore,adaptingtotherobotstrategycor-
ingtheagent’sexpectedtotalreward. respondstorotatingthetabletotheoptimalconfiguration.

624 TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch36(5–7)
withtherobot.WenotethatintheFixedconditionallpar-
ticipantsendedupchangingtotherobotstrategy,asthiswas
theonlywaytocompletethetask.
H3 The robot’s performance as a teammate, as perceived
bytheparticipantsintheMutual-adaptationcondition,will
not be worse than in the Cross-training condition. The
learned MOMDP policy enables the robot to follow the
preference of participants that are less adaptable, while
guidingtowardstheoptimalgoalparticipantsthatarewill-
ingtochangetheirstrategy.Therefore,wepositedthatthis
behaviorwouldresultinaperceivedrobotperformancenot
Fig. 6. Instances of different user behaviors in the first trial of
inferiortothatachievedintheCross-trainingcondition.
the Mutual-adaptation session of the human-subject experiment
described in Section 6. A horizontal/vertical line segment indi-
cateshumanandrobotdisagreement/agreementontheiractions. 6.3. Experimentsetting:Atable-carryingtask
A solid/dashed line indicates a human rotation towards the sub-
We first instructed participants in the task and asked them
optimal/optimal goal. The numbers denote the most likely esti-
tochooseoneofthetwogoalconfigurations(Figure1),as
matedvalueofα.
their preferred way of accomplishing the task. To prompt
users to prefer the sub-optimal goal, we informed them
about the starting state of the task, where the table was
Cross-training session. Human and robot train together
slightlyrotatedinthecounter-clockwisedirection,making
usingthehuman-robotcross-trainingalgorithm(Nikolaidis
thesub-optimalGoalBappearcloser.Oncethetaskstarted,
andShah,2013).Thealgorithmconsistsofaforwardphase
theuserchosetherotationactionsbyclickingonbuttonson
and a rotation phase. In the forward phase, the robot exe-
a user interface (Figure 7). If the robot executed the same
cutes an initial policy, which we choose to be the one that
action, a video played showing the table rotation. Other-
leads to the optimal goal. Therefore, in the table-carrying
wise, the table did not move and a message appeared on
scenario,therobotrotatesthetableintheclockwisedirec-
the screen notifying the user that they tried to rotate the
tion towards Goal A. In the rotation phase, human and
tableinadifferentdirectionthantherobot.IntheMutual-
robotswitchroles,andthehumaninputsareusedtoupdate
adaptation and Fixed conditions participants executed the
the robot reward function. After the two phases, the robot
tasktwice.Eachtrialendedwhentheteamreachedoneof
policyisrecomputed.
thetwogoalconfigurations.IntheCross-trainingcondition,
participantsexecutedtheforwardphaseofthealgorithmin
thefirsttrialandtherotationphase,wherehumanandrobot
6.2. Hypotheses
switched roles, in the second trial. We found that in this
H1 Participants will agree more strongly that HERB is task one rotation phase was enough for users to success-
trustworthy, and will be more satisfied with the team per- fully demonstrate their preference to the robot. Following
formance in the Mutual-adaptation condition, when com- NikolaidisandShah(2013),therobotexecutedtheupdated
pared to working with the robot in the Fixed condition. policy with the participant in a task-execution phase that
Weexpecteduserstotrustmoretherobotwiththelearned succeededtherotationphase.
MOMDP policy, when compared with the robot that exe- We asked all participants to answer a post-experimental
cutes a fixed strategy ignoring the user’s willingness to questionnaire that used a five-point Likert scale to assess
adapt. In prior work, a task-level executive that adapted to their responses to working with the robot (Table 2). We
the human partner significantly improved perceived robot usedthecompositemeasuresproposedbyHoffman(2013).
trustworthiness (Shah et al., 2011). Additionally, working Questions 1 and 3 are from Hoffman’s measure of
with a human-aware robot that adapted its motions had a “Robot Teammate Traits”, while questions 4-6 are
significantimpactonhumansatisfaction(LasotaandShah, from Hoffman’s adaptation of the “Working Alliance
2015). Index” for human-robot teams. Items 7-8 were proposed
H2Participantsaremorelikelytoadapttotherobotstrat- by Gombolayetal.(2014) as additional metrics of team-
egytowardstheoptimalgoalintheMutual-adaptationcon- fluency. We added questions 9-10 were based on our intu-
dition, when compared to working with the robot in the ition. Participants also responded to open-ended questions
Cross-training condition. The computed MOMDP policy abouttheirexperience.
enables the robot to infer online the adaptability of the
human and guides adaptable users towards more effective
6.4. Subjectallocation
strategies. Therefore, we posited that more subjects would
change their strategy when working with the robot in the Wechoseabetween-subjectsdesigninordertonotbiasthe
Mutual-adaptationcondition,comparedwithcross-training userswithpoliciesfrompreviousconditions.Werecruited

Nikolaidisetal. 625
Table 1. Participants’ response to question “Did you complete 6.5. MOMDPmodel
the hallway task following your initial preference? Justify your
The observable state variables x of the MOMDP formula-
answer”.
tion were the discretized table orientation and the human
Justification Examplequote
androbotmodesforeachofthethreeprevioustime-steps.
We specified two modal policies, each deterministically
J1 Expectation on robot “I knew that the robot
behavior would change if I stood my selectingrotationactionstowardseachgoal.Thesizeofthe
ground.” observable state-space X was 734 states. We set a history
J2 Simplicity “Ithoughtitwouldbeeasier lengthk = 3inBAM.Weadditionallyassumedadiscrete
thatIswitched.” setofvaluesoftheadaptabilityα:{0.0,0.25,0.5,0.75,1.0}.
J3 Task-specificfactors “I was on the correct side Although a higher resolution in the discretization of α
(you should walk on the is possible, we empirically verified that five values were
righthandside).”
enoughtocapturethedifferentadaptivebehaviorsobserved
J4 Robotbehavior “HERB decided to go the
inthistask.ThetotalsizeoftheMOMDPstate-spacewas
samewayasIdid.”
5 × 734 = 3670 states. The human and robot actions
J5 Taskcompletion “To finish the task in the
aH, aR were deterministic discrete table rotations. We set
otherendofthehall.”
the reward function R to be positive at the two goal con-
J6 Other “Itendtostickwithmyini-
tialchoices.” figurations based on their relative cost, and 0 elsewhere.
We computed the robot policy using the SARSOP solver
(Kurniawatietal.,2008),apoint-basedapproximationalgo-
rithmwhich,combinedwiththeMOMDPformulation,can
scaleuptohundredsofthousandsofstates(Bandyopadhyay
etal.,2013).
7. Resultsanddiscussion
7.1. Subjectivemeasures
We consider hypothesis H1, that participants will agree
more strongly that HERB is trustworthy, and will be
more satisfied with the team performance in the Mutual-
adaptation condition, compared to working with the robot
in the Fixed condition. A two-tailed Mann–Whitney–
Wilcoxontestshowedthatparticipantsindeedagreedmore
strongly that the robot utilizing the proposed formalism
is trustworthy (U = 180,p = 0.048). No statistically
significant differences were found for responses to state-
mentselicitinghumansatisfaction:“Iwassatisfiedwiththe
robotandmyperformance”and“HERBandIcollaborated
Fig.7. UIwithinstructions.UI:UserInterface.
welltogether”.Onepossibleexplanationisthatparticipants
interactedwiththerobotthroughauserinterfaceforashort
period of time, therefore the impact of the interaction on
usersatisfactionwaslimited.
We were also interested in observing how the ratings
participants through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service,
in the first two conditions varied, depending on the par-
all from the United States, aged 18–65 and with approval
ticipants’ willingness to change their strategy. Therefore,
rates higher than 95%. Each participant was compensated
weconductedapost-hocexperimentalanalysisofthedata,
$0.50. Since we are interested in exploring human-robot
groupingtheparticipantsbasedontheiradaptability.Since
mutual adaptation, we disregarded participants that had as
thetrueadaptabilityofeachparticipantisunknown,weesti-
initial preference the robot goal. To ensure reliability of
mateditbythemodeofthebeliefformedbytherobotatthe
theresults,weaskedallparticipantsacontrolquestionthat
endofthetaskontheadaptabilityα
testedtheirattentiontothetaskandeliminateddataassoci-
atedwithwronganswerstothisquestion,aswellasincom-
αˆ =argmaxb(α) (4)
pletedata.TotesttheirattentiontotheLikertquestionnaire,
α
we included a negative statement with the opposite mean-
ing to its positive counterpart and eliminated data associ- We considered only users whose mode was larger than a
ated with positive or negative ratings to both statements, confidence threshold and grouped them as very adaptable
resultinginatotalof69samples. if αˆ > 0.75, moderately adaptable if 0.5 < αˆ ≤ 0.75,

626 TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch36(5–7)
Fig.8. Beliefupdateandtableconfigurationsforthe1-step(top)and3-step(bottom)boundedmemorymodelsatsuccessivetime-steps.
(T =1)Afterthefirstdisagreementandintheabsenceofanyprevioushistory,thebeliefremainsuniformoverα.Thehuman(white
dot)followstheirmodalpolicyfromtheprevioustime-step,thereforeatT = 2thebeliefbecomeshigherforsmallervaluesofα in
bothmodels(loweradaptability).(T =2)Therobot(blackdot)adaptstothehumanandexecutesthehumanmodalpolicy.Atthesame
time,thehumanswitchestotherobotmode,thereforeatT =3theprobabilitymassmovestotheright.(T =3)Thehumanswitches
backtotheirinitialmode.Inthe3-stepmodeltheresultingdistributionatT =4hasapositiveskewness:therobotestimatesthehuman
tobenon-adaptable.Inthe1-stepmodeltherobotincorrectlyinfersthatthehumanadaptedtotherobotmodeoftheprevioustime-step,
andtheprobabilitydistributionhasanegativeskewness.(T = 4,5)Therobotinthe3-steptrialswitchestothehumanmodalpolicy,
whereasinthe1-steptrialitdoesnotadapttothehuman,whoinsistsontheirmode.
and non-adaptable if αˆ ≤ 0.5. Figure 10b shows the par- Table2. Post-experimentalquestionnaire.
ticipants’ rating of their agreement on the robot trustwor-
Q1:“HERBistrustworthy.”
thiness,asafunctionoftheparticipants’groupforthetwo Q2:“ItrustedHERBtodotherightthingattherighttime.”
conditions.IntheFixedconditiontherewasatrendtowards Q3:“HERBisintelligent.”
positive correlation between the annotated robot trustwor- Q4:“HERBperceivedaccuratelywhatmygoalsare.”
thiness and participants’ inferred adaptability (Pearson’s Q5:“HERBdidnotunderstandhowIwantedtodothetask.”
r = 0.452, p = 0.091), whereas there was no correlation Q6:“HERBandIworkedtowardsmutuallyagreedupongoals.”
between the two for participants in the Mutual-adaptation Q7:“IwassatisfiedwithHERBandmyperformance.”
Q8:“HERBandIcollaboratedwelltogether.”
condition (r = −0.066). We attribute this to the MOMDP
Q9:“HERBmademechangemymindduringthetask.”
formulationallowingtherobottoreasonoveritsestimateon
Q10:“HERB’sactionswerereasonable.”
theadaptabilityofitsteammateandchangeitsownstrategy
wheninteractingwithnon-adaptableparticipants,therefore
maintaininghumantrust.
Inthiswork,weelicitedtrustattheendofthetaskusing other hand, 26% of users in the Mutual-adaptation condi-
participants’ rating of their agreement to the statement tionnotedthattherobot“attemptedtoanticipatemymoves”
“HERB is trustworthy”, which has been used in previous and “understood which way I wanted to go” (C2). Several
workinhuman-robotcollaboration(Shahetal.,2011;Hoff- adaptable participants in both conditions commented that
man,2013).WereferthereadertoDesai(2012),Kaniarasu “[HERB] was programmed to move this way” (C5), while
etal.(2013),XuandDudek(2015)andYancoetal.(2016) some of them attempted to justify HERB’s actions, stating
forapproachesonmeasuringtrustinreal-time. thatit“wasprobablyunabletomovebackwards”(C4).
Weadditionallycodedtheparticipants’open-endedcom- Recall hypothesis H3: that the robot’s performance as a
ments about their experience with working with HERB, teammateintheMutual-adaptationcondition,asperceived
and grouped them based on the content and the sentiment by the participants, would not be worse than in the Cross-
(positive,negative, orneutral).Table3showsthedifferent trainingcondition.Wedefine“notworsethan”similarlyto
comments and associated sentiments, and Figure 9 illus- Draganetal.(2013)usingtheconceptof“non-inferiority”
tratestheparticipants’ratioforeachcomment.Wenotethat (Lesaffre, 2008). A one-tailed unpaired t-test for a non-
20% of participants in the Fixed condition had a negative inferioritymargin1 = 0.5andalevelofstatisticalsignif-
opinionabouttherobotbehavior,notingthat“[HERB]was icance α = 0.025 showed that participants in the Mutual-
poorly designed”, and that probably “robot development adaptationconditionratedtheirsatisfactiononrobotperfor-
hadnotbeenmasteredbyengineers”(C8inTable3).Onthe mance (p = 0.006), robot intelligence (p = 0.024), robot

Nikolaidisetal. 627
Table3. Participants’commentsandassociatedsentiments. 7.3. Selectionofhistorylength
Description Sentiment Thevalueofk inBAMindicatesthenumberoftime-steps
in the past that we assume humans consider in their deci-
C1 “Therobotfollowedmyinstructions.” Positive
sionmakingonaparticulartask,ignoringallotherhistory.
C2 “Therobotadaptedtomyactions.” Positive
C3 “Therobotwantedtobeefficient.” Positive Increasing k results in an exponential increase of the state
C4 “Therobotwasunabletomove.” Neutral space size, with large values reducing the robot’s respon-
C5 “Therobotwasprogrammedthisway.” Neutral siveness to changes in the human behavior. On the other
C6 “Therobotwantedtofacethedoor.” Neutral hand,verysmallvaluesresultinunrealisticassumptionson
C7 “Therobotwasstubborn.” Negative thehumandecisionmakingprocess.
C8 “Therobotwaspoorlyprogrammed.” Negative To illustrate this, we set k = 1 and ran a pilot study of
30participantsthroughAmazon-Turk.Whereasmostusers
ratedhighlytheiragreementtoquestionsassessingtheirsat-
isfactionandtrustintherobot,someparticipantsexpressed
their strong dissatisfaction with the robot behavior. This
occurred when human and robot oscillated back and forth
betweenmodes,similarlytowhentwopedestriansonanar-
rowstreetfaceeachotherandswitchsidessimultaneously
untiltheyreachanagreement.Inthiscase,whichoccurred
in 23% of the samples, when the human switched back to
their initial mode, which was also the robot mode of the
previous time-step, the robot incorrectly inferred them as
adaptable. However, the user in fact resumed their initial
Fig. 9. Ratio of participants per comment for the Mutual-
modefollowedbeforetwotime-steps,implyingatendency
adaptationandFixedconditions.
fornon-adaptation.Thisisacasewherethe1-stepbounded
memoryassumptiondidnothold.
In the human subject experiment of Section 6, we used
trustworthiness (p < 0.001), quality of robot actions (p <
k =3,sincewefoundthistodescribeaccuratelythehuman
0.001),andqualityofcollaboration(p = 0.002)notworse
behaviorinthistask.Figure8showsthebeliefupdateand
thanparticipantsintheCross-trainingcondition.WithBon-
robot behavior for k = 1 and k = 3, in the case of mode
ferroni corrections for multiple comparisons, robot trust-
oscillation.
worthiness, quality of robot actions, and quality of collab-
orationremainsignificant.ThissupportshypothesisH3of
Section6.2.
7.4. Discussion
Thisonlinestudyinthetable-carryingtaskseemstosuggest
that the proposed formalism enables a human-robot team
7.2. Quantitative measures
to achieve more effective policies, compared to state-of-
TotesthypothesisH2,weconsidertheratioofparticipants the-art human-robot team training practices, while achiev-
thatchangedtheirstrategytotherobotstrategytowardsthe ing subjective ratings on robot performance and trust that
optimal goal in the Mutual-adaptation and Cross-training are comparable to those achieved by these practices. It is
conditions. A change was detected when the participant importanttonotethatthecomparisonwiththehuman-robot
startedasapreferredstrategyatablerotationtowardsGoal cross-training algorithm is done in the context of human
B(Figure1b),butcompletedthetaskintheconfigurationof adaptation.Previouswork(NikolaidisandShah,2013)has
GoalA(Figure1a)inthefinaltrialoftheMutual-adaptation shown that switching roles can result in significant bene-
session,orinthetask-executionphaseoftheCross-training fits in team fluency metrics, such as human idle time and
session.AsFigure10ashows,57%ofparticipantsadapted concurrent motion (Hoffman and Breazeal, 2007), when a
to the robot in the Mutual-adaptation condition, whereas human executes the task with an actual robot. Addition-
26%adaptedtotherobotintheCross-trainingcondition.A ally, the proposed formalism assumes as input a set of
Pearson’s chi-square test showed that the difference is sta- modalpolicies,aswellasaqualitymeasureassociatedwith
tistically significant (χ2(1,N = 46)= 4.39,p = 0.036). eachpolicy.Ontheotherhand,cross-trainingrequiresonly
Therefore,participantsthatinteractedwiththerobotofthe an initialization of a reward function of the state space,
proposedformalismweremorelikelytoswitchtotherobot which is then updated in the rotation phase through inter-
strategy towards the optimal goal, than participants that action. It would be very interesting to explore a hybrid
cross-trainedwiththerobot,whichsupportsourhypothesis. approach between learning the reward function and guid-
InSection7.3,wediscusstherobot’sbehaviorfordiffer- ingthehumantowardsanoptimalpolicy,butweleavethis
entvaluesofhistorylengthkinBAM. forfuturework.

628 TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch36(5–7)
Fig.10. (a)NumberofparticipantsthatadaptedtotherobotfortheMutual-adaptationandCross-trainingconditions.(b)Ratingof
agreementtostatement“HERBistrustworthy”.Notethatthefiguredoesnotincludeparticipants,whosemodeofthebeliefontheir
adaptabilitywasbelowaconfidencethresholdandthereforewerenotclusteredintoanyofthethreegroups.
7.5. Information-seeking behavior 3. While we assumed that the modal policies are fully
observable, an assumption that enables the human and
Weobservethatintheexperiments,therobotalwaysstarts
the robot to infer a mode by observing an action, in
moving towards the optimal goal, until it is confident that
thegeneralcasedifferentmodalpoliciesmaysharethe
the human is non-adaptable, in which case it adapts to the
sameactionselectioninsomestates,whichwouldmake
human. The MOMDP chooses whether the robot should
them undeterminable. In this case, the proposed for-
adaptornot,basedontheestimateofthehumanadaptabil-
malismcanbegeneralizedtoincludethehumanmodal
ity,therewardsoftheoptimalandsuboptimalgoalandthe
policyasadditionallatentvariableintheMOMDP.Sim-
discountfactor.
ilarly, we can model the human as inferring a proba-
In the general case, information-seeking actions can
bility distribution over modes from the recent history,
occuratanypointduringthetask.Forinstance,inamulti-
insteadofinferringtherobotmodewiththemaximum
staged task, where information gathering costs differently
frequencycount(equation(2)inSection4.2).Weleave
in different stages (i.e. moving a table out of the room /
thisforfuturework.
through a narrow corridor), the robot might choose to dis-
agreewiththehumaninastagewhereinformation-seeking Finally, we note that the presented formalism assumes
actionsarecheap,evenifthehumanfollowsanoptimalpath that the world-state, representing the current task-step, is
inthatstage. fully observable, and that human and robot have a known
setofactions.Thisassumptionholdsfortaskswithclearly
defined objectives anddistincttask-steps.InSection9,we
7.6. Generalization tocomplextasks applyourformalisminthecasewhereahumanandarobot
cross a hallway and coordinate to avoid collision, and the
Thepresentedtable-carryingtaskcanbegeneralizedwith-
robot guides the human towards one side of the corridor.
out significant modifications in the proposed mathemat-
Applicable scenarios include also a wide range of manu-
ical model, with the cost of increasing the size of the
facturingtasks(e.g.assemblyofairplanespars),wherethe
state-space and action-space. In particular, we made the
goal and important concepts, such as tolerances and com-
assumptions: (1) discrete time-steps, where human and
pletiontimes,aredefinedinadvance,butthesequencingof
robotapplytorquescausingafixedtable-rotation,(2)binary
subtasks is flexible and can vary based on the individual-
human-robot actions, (3) fully observable modal policies.
izedstyleofthemechanic(Nikolaidisetal.,2015).Inthese
Wediscusshowwecanrelaxtheseassumptions;
scenarios,therobotcouldleadthehumantostrategiesthat
requirelesstimeorresources.
1. We can approximate a continuous-time setting by
increasing the resolution of the time discretization.
8. Adaptabilityinrepeatedtrials
Assuming a constant displacement per unit time v and
a time-step dt, the size of the state-space increases Previous work by Shah et al. (2011) has shown that robot
linearly with (1/dt): O(|Xworld||M|2k)= O((θ − adaptationsignificantlyimprovesperceivedrobottrustwor-
max
θ )∗(1/v)∗(1/dt)∗|M|2k), where θ is the rotation thiness.Therefore,wehypothesizedthattrustinthemutu-
min
angleofthetable. allyadaptationconditionwouldincreaseovertimefornon-
2. Theproposedformalismisnotlimitedtobinaryactions. adaptableparticipants,andthatthisincreaseintrustwould
For instance, we can allow torque inputs of different resultinasubsequentincreasedlikelihoodofhumanadap-
magnitudes.Theaction-spaceoftheMOMDPincreases tationtotherobot.Weconductedfourrepeatedtrialsofthe
linearlywiththenumberofpossibleinputs. table-carryingtask.Resultsdidnotconfirmourhypothesis:

Nikolaidisetal. 629
eventhoughtrustincreasedfornon-adaptableparticipants, robot adaptation can significantly improve perceived robot
a large majority of them remained non-adaptable in the trustworthiness(Shahetal.,2011).
secondtaskaswell. H6Participantsaremorelikelytofollowtherobotoptimal
policyinthesecondpartoftheexperiment,comparedtothe
first part. We hypothesized that if, according to hypothe-
8.1. Experimentsetting
sesH4andH5,trustisassociatedwithincreasedlikelihood
Thetaskhastwoparts,eachconsistingoftwotrialsoftask of adapting to the robot in the first part of the experiment,
execution. At the end of the first part, we reset the robot andnon-adaptableparticipantstrusttherobotmoreafterthe
belief on participants’ adaptability to a uniform distribu- first part, a significant ratio of these participants would be
tionoverα.Therefore,inthebeginningofthesecondpart, willing to change their strategy in the second part. Addi-
therobotattemptedagaintoguideparticipantstowardsthe tionally,weexpectedparticipantsthatswitchedtotherobot
optimal goal, identically to the first part of the task. We optimal policy in the first part to continue following that
recruited participants through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk policyinthesecondpart,resultinginanoverallincreasein
service,usingthesameinclusioncriteriaasinSection6.4. thenumberofsubjectsthatfollowtheoptimalgoal.
Each participant was compensated $1. Following the data
collectionprocessdescribedinSection6.4,wedisregarded
participants that had as initial preference the robot goal,
resulting in a total of 43 samples. All participants inter- 8.3. Resultsanddiscussion
acted with the robot following the MOMDP policy com-
WeconsiderHypothesisH4,thattheperceivedrobottrust-
putedusingtheproposedformalism.Afterinstructingpar-
worthiness and the participants’ self-confidence on their
ticipants in the task, as well as after each trial, we asked
abilitytocompletethetask,asmeasuredinthebeginningof
themtorateonafive-pointLikertscaletheiragreementto
theexperiment,willhaveasignificanteffectontheirlikeli-
thefollowingstatements:
hoodtoadapttotherobotinthefirstpartoftheexperiment.
• “HERBistrustworthy”; We performed a logistic regression to ascertain the effects
• “Iamconfidentinmyabilitytocompletethetask”. of the participants’ ratings on these two factors on the
likelihoodthattheyadapttotherobot.Thelogisticregres-
We used the ratings as direct measurements of partici- sionmodelwasstatisticallysignificantχ2(2)= 13.58,p =
pants’self-confidenceandtrustintherobot. 0.001.Themodelexplained36.2%(NagelkerkeR2)ofthe
varianceintheparticipant’sadaptabilityandcorrectlyclas-
sified74.4%ofthecases.Participantsthattrustedtherobot
8.2. Hypotheses
more in the beginning of the task (β = 1.528,p = 0.010)
and were less-confident (β = −1.610,p = 0.008) were
H4 The perceived initial robot trustworthiness and the morelikelytoadapttotherobotinpart1oftheexperiment
participants’ starting self-confidence on their ability to (Figure11).ThissupportshypothesisH4ofSection8.2.
complete the task will have a significant effect on their RecallHypothesisH5,thattherobottrustworthiness,as
likelihoodtoadapttotherobotinthefirstpartoftheexper- perceivedbynon-adaptableparticipants,willincreasedur-
iment.Wehypothesizedthatthemoretheparticipantstrust ingthefirstpartoftheexperiment.Weincludedinthenon-
the robot in the beginning of the task, and the less confi- adaptable group all participants that did not change their
dent they are on their ability, the more likely they would strategy when working with the robot in the first part of
be to adapt to therobot. In previous work, Lee and Moray the experiment. The mean estimated adaptability for these
found that control allocation in a supervisory control sys- participantsattheendofthefirstpartwasαˆ = 0.16[SD=
tem is dependent on the difference between the operator’s 0.14].AWilcoxonsigned-ranktestindeedshowedthatnon-
trustofthesystemandtheirownself-confidencetocontrol adaptable participants agreed more strongly that HERB is
thesystemundermanualcontrol(LeeandMoray,1991). trustworthyafterthefirstpartoftheexperiment,whencom-
H5 The robot’s trustworthiness, as perceived by non- paredtothebeginningofthetask(Z =−3.666,p<0.001),
adaptable participants, will increase during the first part as shown in Figure 11a). In the same figure we see that
of the experiment. We hypothesized that working with a adaptable participants rated highly their agreement on the
robot that reasons over its estimate on participants’ adapt- robottrustworthinessinthebeginningofthetask,andtheir
ability and changes its own strategy accordingly would ratings remained relatively similar through the first part
increase the non-adaptable participants’ trust in the robot. of the task. The results above confirm our hypothesis that
We base this hypothesis by observing in Figure 10b that workingwiththerobotfollowingtheMOMDPpolicyhada
non-adaptableparticipantsintheMutual-adaptationcondi- significanteffectonthenon-adaptableparticipants’trustin
tion agreed strongly to the statement “HERB is trustwor- therobot.
thy” at the end of the task. We focus on non-adaptable To test Hypothesis H6, we consider the ratio of partic-
participants,sincetheyobservetherobotchangingitspol- ipants that followed the robot optimal policy in the first
icy to their preference, and previous work has shown that part of the experiment, compared to the second part of

630 TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch36(5–7)
Fig.11. (a)Ratingofagreementtothestatement“HERBistrustworthy”.forthefirstpartoftheexperimentdescribedinSection8.The
twogroupsindicateparticipantsthatadapted/didnotadapttotherobotduringthefirstpart.(b)Ratingofagreementtothestatement
“Iamconfidentinmyabilitytocompletethetask”.
the experiment. In the second part, 53% of the partici- generalize across multiple tasks, we conducted an experi-
pantsfollowedtherobotgoal,comparedto47%inthefirst mentwithtwodifferentcollaborativetasks:atable-carrying
part. A Pearson’s chi-square test did not find the differ- task followed by a hallway-crossing task. Results showed
ence between the two ratios to be statistically significant that non-adaptable participants in the table-carrying task
(χ2(1,N = 43)= 0.42,p = 0.518). We observed that wouldbelesslikelytoadaptinthehallway-crossingtask.
all participants that adapted to the robot in the first part,
continued following the optimal goal in the second part,
9.1. Hallway-crossingtask
as expected. However, only 13% of non-adaptable partici-
pantsswitchedstrategyinthesecondpart.Weobservethat Weintroducedanewhallway-crossingtask,whereahuman
eventhoughtrustincreasedfornon-adaptableparticipants, and a robot cross a hallway (Figure 12). As in the table-
alargemajorityofthemremainednon-adaptableinthesec- carrying task, we instructed participants of the task and
ondtaskaswell.Weattributethistothefactthatusers,who askedthemfortheirpreferredsideofthehallway.Wethen
successfully completed the task in the first part with the setthesamesideastheoptimalgoalfortherobot,inorder
robot adapting to their preference, were confident that the toensurethattherobot’soptimalpolicywouldconflictwith
sameactionsequencewouldresultinsuccessfulcompletion the human preference. The user chose moving actions by
inthesecondpart,aswell.Infact,aWilcoxonsigned-rank clicking on buttons on a user interface (left / right). If the
testshowedthatnon-adaptableparticipantsratedtheirself- human and robot ended up in the same side, a message
confidenceontheirabilitytocompletethetasksignificantly appeared on the screen notifying the user that they moved
higherafterthefirstpart,comparedtothebeginningofthe in the same direction as the robot. The participant could
task (Z = −2.132,p = 0.033, Figure 11b). It would be thenchoosetoremainonthatside,orswitchsides.Thetask
interesting to assess the adaptability of participants after endedwhenhumanandrobotendedupinoppositesidesof
inducingdropsintheirself-confidence,forinstancebypro- thecorridor.
viding limited explanation about the task or introducing
task“failures”,andweleavethisforfuturework. 9.2. MOMDPmodelofhallway-crossingtask
This experiment showed that non-adaptable participants
The observable state variables x of the MOMDP formu-
remained unwilling to adapt to the robot in repeated trials
lation were the discretized position of the human and the
of the same task. Can this result generalize across multi-
robot, as well as the human and robot modes for each
pletasks?Thisisanimportantquestion,sinceinreal-world
of the three previous time-steps. We specified two modal
applications such as home environments, domestic robots
policies, each deterministically selecting moving actions
are expected to perform a variety of household chores.
towards each side of the corridor. The size of the observ-
We conducted a follow-up experiment, where we explored
ablestate-spaceX was340states.Asinthetable-carrying
whethertheadaptabilityofparticipantsinonetaskisinfor-
task,wesetahistorylengthk = 3andassumedadiscrete
mativeoftheirwillingnesstoadapttotherobotatadifferent
setofvaluesoftheadaptabilityα:{0.0,0.25,0.5,0.75,1.0}.
task.
Therefore, the total size of the MOMDP state-space was
5×340 = 1700 states. The human and robot actions aH,
aRweredeterministicdiscretemotionstowardseachsideof
9. Transferofadaptabilityacrosstasks
thecorridor.WesettherewardfunctionRtobepositiveat
Thepreviousexperimentshowedthatnon-adaptablepartic- thetwogoalstatesbasedontheirrelativecost,and0else-
ipantsremainedunwillingtoadapttotherobotinrepeated where. We computed the robot policy using the SARSOP
trials of the same task. To test whether this result can solver(Kurniawatietal.,2008).

Nikolaidisetal. 631
Fig. 12. (a) Hallway-crossing task. The robot’s optimal goal is to move to the right side (top), compared to moving to the left side
(bottom).(b)Theuserfacestherobot.Theycanchoosetostayonthesamesideorswitchsides.
9.3. Experimentsetting
Wefirstvalidatedtheefficacyoftheproposedformalismby
doingauserstudy(n=65)thatincludedonlythehallway-
crossing task. We recruited participants through Amazon’s
MechanicalTurkservice,usingthesameinclusioncriteria
asinSection6.4.Eachparticipantwascompensated$0.50.
48%ofparticipantsadaptedtotherobotbyswitchingsides,
aratiocomparabletothatofthetable-carryingtaskexper-
iment (Section 7.2). The mean estimated adaptability for
participantsthatadaptedtotherobot,whichwecall“adapt-
able”,wasαˆ = 0.85 [SD=0.25],andforparticipantsthat
didnotadapt(“non-adaptable”)wasαˆ =0.07[SD=0.13]. Fig.13. Adaptationrateofparticipantsfortwoconsecutivetasks.
We then conducted a new human subject experiment, Thelinesillustratetransitions,withthenumbersindicatingtran-
having users do two trials of the table-carrying task sitionrates.Thethicknessofthelinesisproportionaltothetran-
describedin 6.3(part1),followedbythehallway-crossing sition rate, whereas the area of the circles is proportional to the
task (part 2). Similarly to the repeated table-carrying task numberofparticipants.Whereas79%oftheusersthatinsistedin
experiment (Section 8), we reset the robot belief on the theirstrategyinthefirsttaskremainednon-adaptableinthesec-
humanadaptabilityattheendofthefirstpart.Werecruited ond task, only 50% of the users that adapted to the robot in the
participants through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service, table-carrying task, adapted to the robot in the hallway-crossing
using the same inclusion criteria as in Section 6.4, and task.
following the same data collection process, resulting in a
totalofn=58samples.Eachparticipantwascompensated
$1.30.Wemakethefollowinghypothesis:
therobotinthefirsttaskremainednon-adaptableinthesec-
H7Participantsthatdidnotadapttotherobotinthetable-
ondtask,only50%oftheusersthatadaptedtotherobotin
carrying task are less likely to adapt to the robot in the
thetable-carryingtask,adaptedtotherobotinthehallway
hallway task, compared to participants that changed their
task(Figure13).
strategyinthefirsttask.
We interpret this result by observing that all partici-
pantsthatwerenon-adaptableinthefirsttasksawtherobot
changing its behavior to their preferred strategy. A large
9.4. Resultsanddiscussion
majorityexpectedtherobottobehaveinthesamewayinthe
Inlinewithourhypothesis,alogisticregressionmodelwas secondtask,aswell:disagreeinthebeginningbuteventu-
statistically significant (χ2(1)= 5.30,p = 0.021), with allyadapttotheirpreference,andthisencouragedthemto
participants’ adaptability in the first task being a signifi- insist on their preference also in the second task. In fact,
cantpredictoroftheiradaptabilityinthesecondtask(β = intheiranswerstotheopen-endedquestion“Didyoucom-
1.335,p = 0.028). The model explained 11.9% (Nagelk- plete the hallway task following your initial preference?”,
erke R2) of the variance and correctly classified 62.5% of theymentionedthat“Therobotswitchedinthelast[table-
thecases.ThesmallvalueofR2indicatesaweakeffectsize. carrying] task, and I thought it would this time too”, and
Interestingly,whereas79%oftheusersthatdidnotadaptto that“Iknewfromthetable-turningtaskthatHERBwould

632 TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch36(5–7)
be notworse than the performance of therobot that cross-
trained with the participants. Finally, the robot was found
tobemoretrustworthywiththelearnedpolicy,whencom-
pared with executing an optimal strategy while ignoring
humanadaptability(p=0.048).Theseresultsindicatethat
theproposedformalismcansignificantlyimprovetheeffec-
tiveness of human-robot teams, whileachieving subjective
ratingsonrobotperformanceandtrustcomparabletothose
ofstate-of-the-arthuman-robotteamtrainingstrategies.
Fig.14. Ratioofparticipantsperjustificationtothetotalnumber WehaveshownthatBAMcanadequatelycapturehuman
ofparticipantsineachcondition.Wegrouptheparticipantsbased behaviorintwocollaborativetaskswithwell-definedtask-
onwhethertheyadaptedinbothtasks(Adapted-both),inthefirst steps on a relatively fast-paced domain. However, in
[table-carrying]taskonly(Adapted-first),inthesecond[hallway- domains where people typically reflect on a long history
crossing]taskonly(Adapted-second)andinnoneofthetasks(Did ofinteractions,oronthebeliefsoftheotheragents,suchas
notadapt). in a poker game (Von Neumann and Morgenstern, 2007),
peoplearelikelytodemonstratemuchmorecomplexadap-
tive behavior. Developing sophisticated predictive models
eventually figure it out and move in the opposite direc- for such domains and integrating them into robot decision
tion,soIstoodmyground” (J1inTable1,Figure14).On making in a principled way, while maintaining computa-
theother hand, adaptable participants didnothave enough tionaltractability,isanexcitingareaforfuturework.
informationontherobotabilitytoadapt,sincetheyaligned
their own strategy with the robot policy, and they were
evenlydividedbetweenadaptableandnon-adaptableinthe Acknowledgements
second task. 47% of participants that remained adaptable
We thank Michael Koval, Henny Admoni, Shervin Javdani, and
in both tasks attributed the change in their strategy to the
LauraHerlantforveryhelpfuldiscussionsandadvice.
robot’sbehavior(J4).Interestingly,29%ofparticipantsthat
adapted to the robot in the table-carrying task but insisted
ontheirstrategyinthehallwaytaskstatedthattheydidso, Funding
“because I was on the correct side (you should walk on
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial sup-
therighthandside)andIkneweventuallyhewouldmove”
port for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this arti-
(J3).Weseethattask-specificfactors,suchassocialnorms,
cle:ThisworkwassupportedbytheDARPASIMPLEXprogram
affected the expectation of some participants on the robot
through ARO contract number 67904LSDRP, National Institute
adaptabilityforthehallwaytask.Wehypothesizethatthere
of Health R01 (#R01EB019335), National Science Foundation
isaninverserelationshipbetweenparticipants’adaptability,
CPS (#1544797), and the Office of Naval Research. We also
as it evolves over time, and their belief on the robot’s own
acknowledgetheOnassisFoundationasasponsor.
adaptability,andweleavethetestingofthishypothesisfor
futurework.
References
Abbeel P and Ng A (2004) Apprenticeship learning via
10. Conclusion inversereinforcementlearning.In:Internationalconferenceon
machinelearning,Banff,Alberta,Canada,July04–082004,p.
Wepresentedaformalismforhuman-robotmutualadapta-
1.NewYork,USA:AMC.
tion, which enables guiding the human teammate towards
Akgun B, Cakmak M, Yoo JW, et al. (2012) Trajectories and
moreefficientstrategies,whilemaintaininghumantrustin keyframesforkinestheticteaching:Ahuman-robotinteraction
therobot.First,weproposedBAM,amodelofhumanadap- perspective.In:Internationalconferenceonhuman-robotinter-
tationbasedonaboundedmemoryassumption.Themodel action.Boston,Massachusetts,USA,05–08March2012,pp.
is parameterized by the adaptability of the human team- 391–398.NewYork,NY,USA:ACM.
mate, which takes into account individual differences in Argall BD, Chernova S, Veloso M, et al. (2009) A survey of
people’s willingness to adapt to the robot. We then inte- robotlearningfromdemonstration.RoboticsandAutonomous
Systems.57(5):469–483.
grated BAM into an MOMDP formulation, wherein the
Atkeson CG and Schaal S (1997) Robot learning from demon-
adaptabilitywasapartiallyobservablevariable.Inahuman
stration.In:ProceedingsoftheFourteenthInternationalCon-
subjectexperiment(n=69),participantsweresignificantly
ferenceonMarhineLearning,MorganKaufmann,ICML‘97,
morelikelytoadapttotherobotstrategytowardstheopti-
08–12July1997,pp.12–20.
malgoalwhenworkingwitharobotutilizingourformalism
AumannRJandSorinS(1989)Cooperationandboundedrecall.
(p = 0.036), compared to cross-training with the robot. GamesandEconomicBehavior.1(1):5–39.Elsevier.
Additionally,participantsfoundtheperformanceasateam- Bandyopadhyay T, Won KS, Frazzoli E, et al. (2013) Intention-
mateoftherobotexecutingthelearnedMOMDPpolicyto awaremotionplanning.In:Proceedingsofthetenthworkshop

Nikolaidisetal. 633
on the algorithmic foundations of robotics. Springer, vol. 86, Kaelbling LP, Littman ML and Cassandra AR (1998) Planning
pp.475–491.Berlin,Heidelberg:Springer. andactinginpartiallyobservablestochasticdomains.Artificial
BrozF,NourbakhshIandSimmonsR(2011)DesigningPOMDP Intelligence.vol.101,Issue102,May1998,pp.99–134.Essex,
modelsofsociallysituatedtasks.In:IEEEinternationalwork- UK:ElsevierSciencePublishersLtd.
shop on robot and human interactive communication, 2011, Kahneman D (2003) Maps of bounded rationality: Psychology
Atlanta,UnitedStates,31July–3August,pp.39–46. forbehavioraleconomics.AmericanEconomicReview.vol.93,
ChernovaSandVelosoM(2008)Teachingmulti-robotcoordina- Issue5,pp.1449–1475.
tionusingdemonstrationofcommunicationandstatesharing. Kanda T, Hirano T, Eaton D, et al. (2004) Interactive robots
In: Proceedings of the 7th International joint conference on as social partners and peer tutors for children: A field trial.
Autonomousagentsandmultiagentsystems,vol.3,Estoril,Por- Human-ComputerInteraction.19(1):61–84.
tugal, 12–16 May 2008. pp. 1183–1186. Richland, SC: Inter- KaniarasuP,SteinfeldA,DesaiM,etal.(2013)Robotconfidence
nationalFoundationforAutonomousAgentsandMulti-agent and trust alignment. In: Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE
Systems. internationalconferenceonhuman-robotinteraction,pp.155–
Desai M (2012) Modeling trust to improve human-robot 156.IEEEPress.
interaction. PhD Thesis, Lowell, MA: University of Mas- KarpasE,LevineSJ,YuP,etal.(2015)Robustexecutionofplans
sachusettsLowell. forhuman-robotteams.In:Internationalconferenceonauto-
Doshi F and Roy N (2007) Efficient model learning for dialog matedplanningandscheduling7–11June2015,pp.342–346.
management.In:ProceedingsoftheACM/IEEEInternational AAAIPress.
Conference of Human-Robot Interaction, Arlington, Virinia, KurniawatiH,HsuDandLeeWS(2008)Sarsop:Efficientpoint-
USA,10–12March2007,pp.65–72.NY,USA. based pomdp planning by approximating optimally reachable
Dragan A and Srinivasa S (2012) Formalizing assistive teleop- beliefspaces.In:Internationalconferenceonrobotics:Science
eration.In:Internationalconferenceonrobotics:Scienceand andsystemsZurich,Switzerland,2009.pp.65–72.
systems.Sydney,NSW,Australia,July,2012. LasotaPAandShahJA(2015)Analyzingtheeffectsofhuman-
Dragan A and Srinivasa S (2013) Generating legible motion. aware motion planning on close-proximity human–robot col-
In:Internationalconferenceonrobotics:Scienceandsystems. laboration.HumanFactors.57(1):21–33.
Berlin,Germany,June2013. LeeJandMorayN(1991)Trust,self-confidenceandsupervisory
DraganAD,SrinivasaSandLeeKCT(2013)Teleoperationwith control in a process control simulation. In: 1991 IEEE inter-
intelligent and customizable interfaces. Journal of Human- nationalconferenceonsystems,man,andcybernetics.‘Deci-
RobotInteraction.1(3) sion aiding for complex systems’, conference proceedings,
FudenbergDandLevineDK(1998)TheTheoryofLearningin volume1,pp.291–295.
Games.Cambridge,MA:MITPress. LeeJJ,KnoxWB,WormwoodJB,etal.(2013)Computationally
FudenbergDandTiroleJ(1991)GameTheory.Cambridge,MA: modelinginterpersonaltrust.FrontiersinPsychology.4(893).
MITPress. LemonOandPietquinO(2012)Data-DrivenMethodsforAdap-
GombolayMC,GutierrezRA,SturlaGF,etal.(2014)Decision- tive Spoken Dialogue Systems: Computational Learning for
makingauthority,teamefficiencyandhumanworkersatisfac- Conversational Interfaces. New York City, USA: Springer
tioninmixedhuman-robotteams.In:Internationalconference PublishingCompany.
on robotics: Science and systems. Berkeley, California, July LesaffreE(2008)Superiority,equivalence,andnon-inferioritytri-
2014. als. Bulletin of the NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases. 66(2):
Goodrich MA and Schultz AC (2007) Human-robot interac- 150–154.
tion: A survey. Foundations and Trends in Human-Computer Macindoe O, Kaelbling LP and Lozano–Pérez T (2012) POM-
Interaction.1(3):203–275.Boston-Delft. COP:Beliefspaceplanningforsidekicksincooperativegames.
Green A and H´’uttenrauch H (2006) “Making a case for spa- In: Conference on artificial intelligence and interactive digi-
tialpromptinginhuman-robotcommunication,”inmultimodal tal entertainment. Stanford, California, USA, 08–12 October
corpora: From multimodal behaviour theories to usable mod- 2012.pp.38–43.
els. In: Workshop at LREC. Genova, May 2016, Stockholm, Mathieu JE, et al. (2000) The influence of shared mental mod-
Sweden:RoyalInstituteofTechnology. els on team process and performance. Journal of Applied
Hancock PA, Billings DR, Schaefer KE, et al. (2011) A meta- Psychology.85(2):273–283.
analysis of factors affecting trust in human-robot interaction. Monte D (2014) Learning with bounded memory in games.
HumanFactors.October2011.vol.5.pp.517–527.LosAnge- GamesandEconomicBehavior87:204–223.
les,USA:SAGE. Nguyen THD, Hsu D, Lee WS, et al. (2011) Capir: Collabora-
Hoffman G (2013) Evaluating fluency in human-robot col- tive action planning with intention recognition. In: Artificial
laboration. In: International conference on human-robot intelligence and interactive digital entertainment conference.
interaction.Tokyo,Japan.NewYork,NY:ACM. Stanford,California.
HoffmanGandBreazealC(2007)Effectsofanticipatoryaction Nicolescu MN and Mataric MJ (2003) Natural methods for
on human-robot teamwork efficiency, fluency, and percep- robottasklearning:Instructivedemonstrations,generalization
tion of team. In: International conference on human-robot and practice. In: International conference on autonomous
interaction.Arlington,Virginia,USA,10–12March2007.pp. agents and multiagent systems. Melbourne, Australia,
1–8.NewYork,NY,USA:ACM. pp.241–248.
Ikemoto S, Amor HB, Minato T, et al. (2012) Physical human- Nikolaidis S, Kuznetsov A, Hsu D, et al. (2016) Formaliz-
robot interaction: Mutual learning and adaptation. IEEE ing human-robot mutual adaptation via a bounded memory
Robotics&AutomationMagazine.vol.19,issue4,pp.24–35, based model. In: International conference on human-robot
WashingtonDC,USA:IEEE. interaction.Christchurch,NewZealand,pp.75–82.

634 TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch36(5–7)
Nikolaidis S,LasotaP,Ramakrishnan R,et al.(2015) Improved ShahJ,WikenJ,WilliamsB,etal.(2011)Improvedhuman-robot
human–robot team performance through cross-training, an team performance using chaski, a human-inspired plan exe-
approachinspiredbyhumanteamtrainingpractices.TheInter- cution system. In: International conference on human-robot
nationalJournalofRoboticsResearch34(14):1711–1730. interaction.LausanneSwitzerland.pp.29–36.NewYork,NY,
NikolaidisS,RamakrishnanR,GuK,etal.(2015)Efficientmodel USA:ACM.
learningfromjoint-actiondemonstrationsforhuman-robotcol- Simon HA (1979) Rational decision making in business organi-
laborativetasks.In:Internationalconferenceonhuman-robot zations. American Economic Review 493–513. vol. 69, issue
interaction.Portland,Oregon,USA,March2015,pp.189–196. 4, pp. 493–513. Nashville, TN, USA: American Economic
Nikolaidis S and Shah J (2013) Human-robot cross-training: Association.
Computational formulation, modeling and evaluation of a SrinivasaSS,FergusonD,HelfrichCJ,etal.(2010)Herb:Ahome
humanteamtrainingstrategy.In:Internationalconferenceon exploringroboticbutler.AutonomousRobots28(1):5–20.
human-robotinteraction.Tokyo,Japan,pp.33–40. VonNeumannJandMorgensternO(2007)TheoryofGamesand
Ong SCW, Png SW, Hsu D, et al. (2010) Planning under uncer- EconomicBehavior.PrincetonUniversityPress.
taintyforrobotictaskswithmixedobservability.TheInterna- Xu A and Dudek G (2015) Optimo: Online probabilistic trust
tionalJournalofRoboticsResearch29(9). inference model for asymmetric human-robot collaborations.
PlattR,TedrakeR,KaelblingL,etal.(2010)Beliefspaceplan- In: Proceedings of the 10th annual ACM/IEEE international
ningassumingmaximumlikelihoodobservations.In:Interna- conference on human-robot interaction, New York, USA,
tionalconferenceonrobotics:Scienceandsystems.Zaragoza, pp.221–228.Princeton,NewJersey:ACM.
Spain,June2010. YancoHA,DesaiM,DruryJL,etal.(2016)Methodsfordevelop-
PowersRandShohamY(2005)Learningagainstopponentswith ingtrustmodelsforintelligentsystems.In:RobustIntelligence
boundedmemory.In:Internationaljointconferenceonartifi- andTrustinAutonomousSystems.pp.219–254,NewYorkCity:
cialintelligence.Edinburgh,Scotland,July30-August52005, Springer.
pp.817–822. ZiebartBD,RatliffN,GallagherG,etal.(2009)Planning-based
RobinsB,DautenhahnK,BoekhorstRT,etal.(2004)Effectsof predictionforpedestrians.In:IEEE/RSJinternationalconfer-
repeatedexposuretoahumanoidrobotonchildrenwithautism. ence on intelligent robots and systems. St. Louis, MO, USA,
In:DesigningaMoreInclusiveWorld.pp.225–236.NewYork 10–15 October 2009, pp. 3931–3936. Piscataway, NJ, USA:
City,USA:Springer. IEEEPress.
SalemM,LakatosG,AmirabdollahianF,etal.(2015)Wouldyou
trusta(faulty)robot?Effectsoferror,tasktypeandpersonality
onhuman-robotcooperationandtrust.In:Internationalconfer-
ence on human-robot interaction. Portland, Oregon USA, pp.
141–148.NewYork,NY,USA:ACM.